Vol.:(0123456789)1 3Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering (2022) 29:1107–1136 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11831-021-09608-4
SURVEY ARTICLE
A Systematic Survey on CAPTCHA Recognition: Types, Creation 
and Breaking Techniques
Mohinder Kumar1 · M. K. Jindal1 · Munish Kumar2 
Received: 12 April 2021 / Accepted: 19 May 2021 / Published online: 14 June 2021 
© CIMNE, Barcelona, Spain 2021
Abstract
CAPTCHA stands for Completely Automated Public Turing Test to Tell Computers and Human Apart. CAPTCHA is used 
for internet security. A few CAPTCHA schemes are available today like, text-based, audio-based, video/animation-based, 
puzzle based etc. In this paper, all these types are collaborating at single place to analyze. The main aim of this article is to 
present a literature to identify and recognize CAPTCHA, its types, the creation and breaking techniques. It is a systematic 
and complete analysis of all available CAPTCHA types. In this paper, 16 text-based CAPTCHA’s generation methods are 
discussed with usability and security ranges from 3 to 100 and 65 to 100%, respectively. The security and usability meas-
ures are not calculated/sustained using some known English schemes. Out of 16 reviewed CAPTCHAs, 12 are based on 
English language, 1 on Arabic language, 1 on Chinese language, 1 on Devanagari language and 1 on Gurumukhi script. 
The designs are made segment proof with overlapping random shapes, overlapping characters, clasping, different colors 
and different shades. For making recognition proof many techniques are used like image masking, local and global warping; 
broken characters, random rotation, arcs, jaws, etc. Approximately 50 schemes, especially based on the English language, 
are successfully broken with a success rate that ranges from 2 to 100%. The techniques that are used to break these schemes 
include shape context matching, distortion estimation, Log Gabor 2D filter, horizontal and vertical projection (for a segment 
the letters) are used. For recognition CNN, KNN, DNN and MCDNN are used. Almost 15 images-based CAPTCHAs are 
discussed that are designed with usability and security range 90–100 and 17–100%, respectively. Out of these 5 schemes are 
successfully broken with a success rate ranging between 7 and 100%. The K-NN and SVM are mostly used algorithms to 
recognize the images. Audio based CAPTCHAs (5 designs) are discussed with usability and security range from 68.5 to 100 
and 100%, respectively. The broken rate of these audio schemes is also 45–75%. These schemes are broken with SVM and 
K-NN algorithms. The paper also discusses 4 popular video-based designs that provide usability and security that ranges from 
75 to 100 and 98 to 100, respectively. These schemes are also compromised with broken rate 16–10% using SIFT, NN and 
simple OCR techniques. The paper can be a benchmark to precede any specific research to dive into any one of these types.
1 Introduction
In the present era, the internet is a major interaction for 
every person. It does not matter what is the age, profession, 
gender, and sector. The availability of the rich variety of 
mobile devices and cheaper high-speed data plans increased 
the interest of the users for the Internet usage. The variety of 
the content on the web is also multitalented that attracts eve-
ryone. Most of the data is also available at free of cost on the 
Internet that adds the number of users in compounded way. 
As the Internet is becoming the most popular platform to 
provide data services the number of websites and blogs are 
also increasing. Today the web sites are designed for finan-
cial services, public services, entertainment services, gro-
cery products, healthcare services, transportation services,  * Munish Kumar 
 munishcse@gmail.com
 Mohinder Kumar 
 kumarmohinderr@yahoo.co.in
 M. K. Jindal 
 manishphd@rediffmail.com
1 Department of Computer Science and Applications, Panjab 
University Regional Centre, Muktsar, PB, India
2 Department of Computational Sciences, Maharaja Ranjit 
Singh Punjab Technical University, Bathinda, PB, India
1108 M. Kumar et al.
1 3
hotel bookings etc. But the knowledge of the user has been 
also not always good for these web sites. Internet Security is 
always the main challenge for the web developers from the 
beginning. The increasing number of users also demands the 
high-end processing units at the deployed web site, but these 
high-end units are useless if the high-end machine attacks 
these servers. Ahn et al. [3 ] highlighted an instance that 
happened at CMU when the students developed a program 
for submitting ballots in online polls in their schools’ favor. 
So, a program can be trained in such a way that can enter a 
website and makes the server so overloaded with requests 
that in turn results in crashing of the server. This program is 
well known as bot program. A few methods are developed 
by the researchers to stop such kind of attacks. But most of 
the methods are very expensive and demands a lot of efforts 
by the experts as well as like One Time Password etc.
A very effective and cheapest method is CAPTCHA. This 
Reverse Turing Test is also known as Completely Automated 
Public Turing Test to Tell Computers and Humans Apart 
or CAPTCHA in short. In such methods a Reverse Turing 
Test is given to the attacker and depending on the challenge 
passed, it is decided that the attacker is a human or a com-
puter. Naor [48] explained the term Reverse Turing Test 
introduced in 1950, when a Turing Test was introduced to 
check with a human that the other side is introduced by a 
computer or human. In this paper we call it CAPTCHA from 
now to make it easy to write. The CAPTCHA is designed 
in such a way that is easily understandable, but very dif-
ficult for a computer program. Coates et al. [24] text-based 
CAPTCHA shown in Fig.  1a. This includes simple text to 
be recognized easily by a human being but not by a program 
due to some noise and distortion. In the last 20 years a lot of 
CAPTCHAs designs are proposed that includes a large vari-
ety of forms. In this paper, we will discuss all these types of 
designs. We will discuss the design features and the breaking 
methods of these CAPTCHA’s.
2  Security and Usability Metrics of CAPTCHA
A CAPTCHA must hold the sweet spot between solvabil-
ity by computers and humans as depicted in the Fig.  2. A 
delicate balance must be maintained by a valid CAPTCHA 
challenge. It must not be so easy to break by a computer 
program and at the same time is must not be hard to break by a human. Although it is not an easy task to achieve this 
sweet spot as the history of CAPTCHA tells.
A CAPTCHA is assumed to be secure if its success rate 
is less than 0.0001%. It means that out of 10,000 challenges 
only not more than one should be broken by a computer 
program. The usability of a CAPTCHA should be more than 
80% for users. It means that out of 100 challenges 80 times, 
a CAPTCHA should be easily identified by the users within 
a minimum time e.g. 3–5 s.
3  Motivation
CAPTCHAs schemes are of many types like text-based, 
image-based, audio-based, animation- based, puzzle-based, 
video-based, and even now invisible schemes are also intro-
duced by Google. These all schemes are unique in one way. 
The classical text-based schemes use simple text as a chal-
lenge. But these letters are made segment proof and recogni-
tion proof. To make this CAPTCHA noise is added, distor -
tion and warping are applied to the text. Sometimes letters 
are broken and even hidden. In the image-based CAPTCHA 
schemes, the challenges include images of things, persons, 
animals, etc. The user is asked to identify an image among 
the given images. In the animation-based CAPTCHA, the 
text is moving, and a user is asked to identify the text. In the 
video-based schemes the user is asked to identify the type 
of video based on the contents of the video. In puzzle-based 
schemes, the user is given a number puzzle or sometimes 
image-based puzzle. In the latest invisible CAPTCHA, the 
user is provided with a checkbox and the user just need to 
click in the checkbox to pass the challenge. In the previous 
literature, all these CAPTCHAs are never analyzed at a sin-
gle platform. Only the English language text-based schemes 
are discussed in more details as compared to other schemes. 
It motivates us to present all the available CAPTCHAs in 
one platform and perform analysis on all these techniques. 
Many of the review articles pick one type of scheme most 
 Fig. 1  a and b Text based CAPTCHA
Fig. 2  Desired properties of a CAPTCHA
1109 A Systematic Survey on CAPTCHA Recognition: Types, Creation and Breaking Techniques  
1 3
of the times. That does not provide the perfect review for 
the upcoming research. In this paper, an effort is made to 
include all the different types of CAPTCHAs under one 
tree. An effort has been made by analyzing all the text-based 
CAPTCHAs of different languages. All the image-based, 
animation-based, video-based, audio-based CAPTCHAs are 
discussed in detail from their generation to end, like what are 
the techniques used to create these schemes and what are the 
techniques to break these challenges? Also, the guidelines 
are provided to make these successfully broken schemes, 
stronger. In the following sections, the authors have tried to 
find answers to some of the very important research ques -
tions as shown in the Table  1.
4  Source the Information
The various types of available CAPTCHA schemes must 
be understood for this analysis. Such effort requires a big 
collection of the existing research. Large information about 
the existing CAPTCHAs must be required to cover such a 
broad context. The collection of this information is done 
from conference/symposium proceedings, journals, research 
articles, books, etc. The sources that are being referred for 
this study are as follows:
• IEEE eXplore (ieeexplore.ieee.org)
• Springer (www. sprin gerli nk. com)
• ACM Digital Library (www. acm. org/ dl)
• ResearchGate Publications
• Other Reputed Research Journals
• Books and Technical Reports
• Conference / symposium Proceedings
• Ph.D. Thesis
• Relevant Web Articles5  Types of CAPTCHAs
It is important to know about the various types of differ -
ent CAPTCHA schemes. The variety of CAPTCHA is 
so large that it is very beneficial to categorize these tech-
niques. So, for the sake of simplicity, all the different types 
of CAPTCHA schemes are categorized under the following 
heads:
• Text Based
 These are the very basic type of CAPTCHA. These are 
the most widely used CAPTCHA. The user is presented 
a string of characters that are easy to recognize but not 
easy for a computer. The strings can vary from a clear 
text to very noisy text. Text-based CAPTCHA are avail-
able in various flavors like simple text CAPTCHA that 
is very easy to recognize. This CAPTCHA is without 
any kind of warping or noise. Distorted CAPTCHA in 
which the text is not straight forward but distorted to 
make is difficult to recognize by a computer program. 
Characters are also touched so to make the CAPTCHA 
segment proof. Li et al. [40] presented a little noisy with 
little distortion CAPTCHAs includes a few arc or ran-
dom dots etc. (That may be touching or not touching the 
characters of the CAPTCHA to make segment proof). 
A few patters of noise are also presented to make it non 
recognizable. Very noisy, overlapped and much distorted 
CAPTCHAs are hard text CAPTCHA. The presence of 
noise is much more. Characters are rotated, distorted 
with greater level. Imsamai and Phimoltares [35] have 
presented 3D-CAPTCHA. The amount of overlapping 
is also more. These types of CAPTCHA are hard to rec-
ognize for both computer as well as humans. Some of 
the popular text based CAPTCHAs are presented in the 
Table  2:
• Image Based
 The next approach to design a CAPTCHA is image-based 
CAPTCHA. Here, the user is presented with images or 
images with text and asked to pick a correct picture or 
word that belongs to the picture/s. Computer programs 
are not as good as human in identifying graphics. Some 
of the popular image based CAPTCHAs are presented in 
the Table  3.
• Audio Based
 The next category of CAPTCHA is audio-based. Here, 
the user is presented with an audio and user must type or 
press the key for that word or phrase. This CAPTCHA 
can also be very useful for visually impaired users. Two 
techniques are mostly used for audio-based CAPTCHA, 
namely, text-to-speech, and Spoken CAPTCHA. Text-To-
Speech Conversion Method- Here a voice of a recorded 
word/number/phrase is played to the user with some Table 1  Research questions
1 What are the existing types of CAPTCHAs available?
2 What is the national and international status of Text 
Based CAPTCHAs?
3 What the techniques are for generating CAPTCHA?
4 What are the tools and techniques to break CAPTCHA?
5 What tools and techniques to test security of CAPTCHA?
6 What is the usability status of current CAPTCHA?
7 What is the security status of current CAPTCHA?
8 What are the guidelines for making secure CAPTCHA?
1110 M. Kumar et al.
1 3
noise/distortion added. Li [40] explained the user is 
asked to type the played word/number/phrase. Google 
uses this CAPTCHA for visually impaired users for 
its online services. Spoken CAPTCHA-This is another 
approach developed by Shirali-Shahreza et al. [65] for 
users who are unable to see or cannot respond to images. 
In this technique, a selected word from the system’s dic-
tionary is sent to the Text-To-Speech module where an 
audio file is created for that word. This word is played 
before the user and he is asked to say the word. Now, the 
user’s reply is again recorded and sent as a speech file to 
two modules on the server, one is speech recognition and 
human vs. to recognize the word spoken by the user and 
the other is computer analysis, which analyses the reply 
of the user to decide whether this is a computer program 
or the human voice. The conclusion is derived by analyz-
ing these two modules if the voice is from the user and 
provides the correct answer,the user is given access to the 
website. Some of the popular audio based CAPTCHAs 
are presented in the Table  4.
• Video-Based
 Video-based CAPTCHA is a new kind of CAPTCHA. 
But, it requires a much more bandwidth on the inter -
net and requires much more attention of the user. E.g. a video-based CAPTCHA, presented by Kluever and 
Zanibbi [37], asks the user to describe any three words 
about the shown video. Some video CAPTCHA shows 
moving text in the running video. The user is asked to 
type the cheaters of color, etc. Some of the popular image 
based CAPTCHAs are presented in the Table  5.
• Puzzle-Based
 Puzzle-based CAPTCHA is kind of a question that can 
vary from very simple to very complex. A lot of versions 
are available in this form. It can include some games like 
Tic-Tac-Toe, or some mathematical operations like, addi-
tion, subtractions, or any simple reasoning problem like, 
series, or some visual puzzles etc. Some of the popular 
puzzle based CAPTCHAs are presented in the Table  6.
• Mouse-Based
 Recently, Google has developed a new CAPTCHA that 
does not require any text, image, audio or video data for 
pass the test. It requires only one click of the mouse to 
tell the computer, whether there is a human on program 
on the other side. It is known as reCAPTCHA shown 
in Fig.  3. The user is presented with a checkbox and he 
has been asked to just click on it. The checkbox is not 
just a checkbox, but a virtual checkbox. Google inserts 
an invisible text area in the form and populates it with a Table 2  Examples of text based 
CAPTCHAs

1111 A Systematic Survey on CAPTCHA Recognition: Types, Creation and Breaking Techniques  
1 3
Table 2  (continued)

1112 M. Kumar et al.
1 3
value that is unique. This value is working as an indica-
tor that the user is a bot or not. The value can be true 
or false for the test. An online article explained that 
Google not only depends on the checkbox, but it also 
relies on the pattern of movements of the mouse that dif -
ferentiate humans and programs. It also uses user time 
on page algorithms; bots IP addresses database, HTTP 
referrer, number of requests, etc. It also uses algorithms 
for Google Analytic’s (to prevent bots from increas-ing page view) and Google AdSense (to prevent fraud 
clicks on ads) to detect bots. If the reCAPTCHA is not 
sure about the user, then it displays the old-style image 
based Pix CAPTCHA. There is a very important thing 
to note that Google has not disclosed the algorithm that 
how it works. So, according to Ahn et al. [3 ] it is not a 
CAPTCHA because it is not PUBLIC that the definition 
of CAPTCHA says.
• Invisible CAPTCHATable 2  (continued)

1113 A Systematic Survey on CAPTCHA Recognition: Types, Creation and Breaking Techniques  
1 3
Google improved the reCAPTCHA and developed a 
totally new concept, known as No CAPTCHA or Invisible 
reCAPTCHA. This CAPTCHA does not require any kind of 
user interaction that means even the clicking of check box is not required. Ana article at developers.google.com explained 
that, this CAPTCHA is invoked directly when the user clicks 
on an existing button on the web site or it can be invoked via 
a JavaScript API call.Table 3  Examples of image 
based CAPTCHAs

1114 M. Kumar et al.
1 3
Table 4  Examples of audio 
based CAPTCHAs
Table 5  Examples of video/
animation based CAPTCHAs

1115 A Systematic Survey on CAPTCHA Recognition: Types, Creation and Breaking Techniques  
1 3
6  Applications of CAPTCHA
Some of the applications are highlighted in the Fig.  3.
• Restriction on Getting e-mail Address Ahn et al. [3 ] 
explained that web scrapers (Program that extracts data from web sites) can be restricted from getting user’s 
e-mail addresses by presenting a checkpoint to solve a 
CAPTCHA before displaying e-mail address informa-
tion.
• Restriction on Fake E-mail Registration In the modern 
digital life most of the companies provide free e-mail 
services. These are the target of bot attacks. A lot of com-
panies use this technique to get free e-mail accounts from 
which they can send junk mail. The best and easy method 
to avoid these bot attacks is the use of CAPTCHA. Pope 
and Kaur [51] identified that most of the e-mail providers 
have adopted this solution.Table 6  Examples of puzzle 
based CAPTCHAs
Fig. 3  Google mouse CAPTCHA
1116 M. Kumar et al.
1 3
 
countermeasures with sound web site authentication sys-
tem. CAPTCHA is also beneficial in this concern that 
provides a string barrier for bot protection and phish-
ing attack. Figure  2 depicts the various applications of 
CAPTCHAs.
• Restricting Robots from Playing Online Games Golle and 
Ducheneaut [30], Hilaire et al. [31] discovered that using 
Table 7  Text based CAPTCHA development in different countries
Language Country
Arabic Saudi Arabia, USA, Iran, Vietnam
Chinese China, UK, USA
Devanagari India, USA, China, USA, Vietnam
English USA, Iraw, UK, China, Vietnam,India
Persian Iran
Punjabi India
Urdu India• Defending Phishing Attacks Phishing is used by 
non-ethical hackers (crackers) to crack into online bank -
ing accounts, social site accounts and e-mail accounts by 
presenting a similar fake web page to befool the account 
holders. For example a link is send by these crackers to 
some targeted account holders into their e-mail accounts 
and as they click on the link along with submitting some 
critical information (usernames, passwords etc.). In 
this way they lose their personal information like office 
related documents, project tenders etc. In modern days 
bank details like usernames, passwords and credit/debit 
card details are collected by phishing attackers. Some 
websites are duplicates of some original financial web 
sites and user is grabbed by giving secret and confiden-
tial details of these fake sites. These Crackers do not use 
their own system to crack the online accounts that makes 
it very difficult to find these phishing attackers. Cyber 
Law is also not so strong to punish such non-ethical 
hackers. In such situations a web site must adopt some 
1117 A Systematic Survey on CAPTCHA Recognition: Types, Creation and Breaking Techniques  
1 3
by the CAPTCHA, it is very easy to restrict robots or 
computer from playing online games. This is a fair play 
for fraud players.
• Preventing Dictionary Attacks An online article 
explained that dictionary attack is a technique for defeat-
ing an authentication mechanism by trying to guess its 
secret password or passphrase by retrieving likely possi -
bilities. Chakrabarti and Singhal [16], Pinkas and Sander 
[49] explained that in such situations CAPTCHA can 
be very effective for defending against such dictionary 
attacks.
• A Solution for Worms and Spam  CAPTCHA is used pro -
vides a solution against worms and spam to receive mail 
only if there is not a computer program but human behind 
it.
• Better Password Management  After a fixed number of 
wrong attempts of password, an account gets locked, but 
it is not a better solution. Ahn et al. [3 ] explained that if 
the attempts are made by a computer program then it can 
replace by entering a CAPTCHA to prove that there is a 
human on the other side and not a computer program.
• A Barrier for Search Engine Bots  Pope and Kaur [ 51] 
also explained that if a company wants that its web pages 
are not be indexed then CAPTCHA can play a very 
important barrier for rejecting any computer program 
that try to index a web page.
• Restrict Automatic Online Polls CAPTCHA can also be 
utilized to restrict a computer program to cast a vote for 
online polls. Ahn et al. [3 ] and Pope and Kaur [51] pre-
sented the idea that, however, it cannot be used to restrict 
a human from voting more than one time.
• A Solution for Rejecting Shopping Agent It is very com-
mon today to develop a software that gives you a com-
plete comparative analysis of prices from various similar 
web-sites, e.g. makemytrip, trivago etc. The online stores 
have a loss because the user is not able to see all the 
advertisements from these online stores. To reject such 
software from revealing price details the CAPTCHA can 
be used very effectively.
7  Reported Work on Text Based CAPTCHAs
First of all it is found that Text based CAPTCHAs are devel-
oped all around the world. Table  7 shows the various coun-
tries in which the Text Based CAPTCHAs are developed that 
in short it tells the National and International status of these 
Text Based schemes:
7.1  Creation of Text Based CAPTCHA’s
In this section, the authors have presented CAPTCHA gen-
eration techniques. Chen et al. [19] discussed the most popular CAPTCHA scheme is text-based CAPTCHA that 
starts with Gimpy CAPTCHA. Thereafter, a lot of text-based 
CAPTCHA comes into the world of internet. Baffel text-
based CAPTCHA was developed by Chew and Baird [ 20] at 
the Palo Alto Research centre. They designed their 
CAPTCHA after studying the psychophysics of human read -
ing. The Baffle CAPTCHA is an enhanced version of Pes-
simalPrint CAPTCHA because PessimalPrint is a diction-
ary-based challenge and it has only 70 words, so it is very 
easy to break with the probability of 1/70 success. On the 
other hand, Baffle text is not based on dictionary words. 
Rusu and Govindaraju [53] proposed a handwritten 
CAPTCHA. It was the first proposal of handwritten 
CAPTCHA. The scheme uses two kinds of challenges: 
actual city names of US (4000) and with challenges gener -
ated by random handwritten letters (20,000). The author 
tested these challenges with advanced word recognizers 
Word Model Recognizer and HMM Recognizer. Testing was 
performed on 4127 city names and 3000 words of random 
letters. They also reported 18% error rate by humans as well, 
so they also decided to remove some of the confusing letters 
for enhancing the usability of the handwritten CAPTCHA. 
Chellapilla et al. [17] proposed a new kind of segment proof 
CAPTCHA. The author proposed a baseline for designing 
new challenge that is made up of level 20 of translation, level 
20 of rotation, level 20 of scaling and level 75 of global 
warming. The author proposed a few schemes like the local 
warp + baseline, Thin Arcs that Intersect + Baseline, Thick 
Arcs that Intersect + Baseline and Arcs that don’t inter -
sect + baseline etc. The author also showed that the human 
usability is 90% and above. Chow et al. [22] proposed a 
Clickable CAPTCHA. This CAPTCHA is also based on text 
CAPTCHA, but it is designed for mobile devices where a 
keyboard is not presented, or the keyboard takes a lot of time 
that makes the user frustrated. The user is given a grid of 
3 × 4 or 3 × 5 of distorted text images as shown in Fig.  2 and 
asked to click on the English words because not all the words 
are true English words. This CAPTCHA is like Microsoft’s 
image based ASIRRA CAPTCHA developed by Elson et al. 
[26] but it has some advantages. Initially, ASIRRA 
CAPTCHA is based on a hypothesis that images of animals 
are not recognized by the computer. But, Golle [29] shows 
that the problem of telling cats from dogs automatically is 
significantly easier than hypothesized by the ASIRRA 
designers on the other hand Clickable CAPTCHA has the 
security features of text-based CAPTCHA. The second 
advantage is that text images can be generated algorithmi-
cally while the images of cats and dogs are taken from the 
database that is very small and more vulnerable to attack. 
The optimal desired success rate of a CAPTCHA is 1 out of 
1000. So Clickable CAPTCHAs can be solved 30% faster 
with a cell phone screen and keypad than Google 
CAPTCHAs. Thomas et al. [72] proposed a new type of 
1118 M. Kumar et al.
1 3
text-based CAPTCHA that is made of two type’s handwrit-
ten and printed text. They achieved 77% accuracy of humans 
and less than 0.0001 accuracy of machine in recognizing this 
new CAPTCHA. The testing is done with OCR by giving a 
segmented challenge by assuming that these CAPTCHA can 
be broken with segmentation attack. The challenge is made 
segmented proof by perturbation of text. Imsamai and Phi-
moltares [35] designed a new 3D CAPTCHA in 2010. In 
April 2014, with some improvement they used it as in an 
article by Parc’s Captchas (2014). Six random alphanumeric 
letters are given to the user with a lot of distortion like rota-
tion, overlapping, straight line in the middle, salt and pepper 
noise, background with color/patterns, character color vari-
ation, scaling of characters, font variation, use of special 
characters are used to make it attack proof. The author has 
shown that the scheme is resistant to pre-processing, vertical 
segmentation, Color Filling Segmentation, pixel count 
attack, OCR and Dictionary attack. Susilo et al. [69] pro-
posed a Stereoscopic 3D CAPTCHA. The proposed scheme 
is text-based CAPTCHA built from stereoscopic 3D images. 
However, a clear limitation is that it is usable only with the 
help of 3D display glasses. It is very secure as the 3D images 
produce a lot of noise. The variable length also strengthens 
it. Tomas and Govindaraju proposed a synthetic handwritten 
CAPTHCA. 20,000-character images were taken from US 
mail and each character image is processed for making it real 
handwritten word by following 7 steps like a character auto 
scaling, automatic base line determination, ligature endpoint 
detection, ligature parameterization, ligature joining, skel -
eton perturbation and skeleton thickening. The generated 
CAPTCHA is tested by the program as well as humans. The 
machine accuracy was 2.6% and the human accuracy was 
84%. Rusu et al. [54] extended this idea for generating more 
verities of this synthetic handwritten CAPTCHA. The idea 
was based on the concept of Gestalt Laws of Perception and 
Geon Theory that says that humans are very comfortable in 
recognizing an object even with its incomplete image. To 
design a more secure CAPTCHA noise addition, segmenta-
tion errors, variable stroke, variable slope and random rota-
tion and stretching is used. Overlapping of characters, occlu-
sion by small circles, rectangle, occlusions by waves where 
more foreground pixels are present, occlusion by same pixels 
color arcs, lines with various thickness as foreground pixels 
colors, use of empty, broken and letter fragmentations, split-
ting of images in horizontal, vertical or diagonal parts, add-
ing extra strokes of foreground color and changing orienta-
tion of words or letters are used for making string design. 
The author also highlighted some transformations that can 
be reversed like gaps in image but not successful reversed if 
handwriting is slant, mosaic effects (separation in parts) but 
not successfully reversed if discontinuity in strokes that 
remove parts of image, waves but not successively reversed 
if wave thickness is same as character thickness, overlapping is reversed successively but not if random overlapping is 
used within characters, arcs/jaws but not successively 
reversed if thickness is same as of characters, fragmentation 
is not reversed, more complex background noise is not easily 
reversed. The accuracy of the design for humans is 82% and 
computer is 0. Yalamanchili and Rao [74] proposed a 
Devanagari script-based CAPTCHA. The word is a random 
number of letter words. The word contains “Matra” as well. 
To add the noise in a few patterns like mosaic, arcs/jaws, 
vertically overlapped patterns are used. The headline is also 
removed to make it unrecognizable for the bots. The author 
has not given any accuracy rate of the humans as well as 
error rate of the bot for the new CAPTCHA. Alsuhibany [6 ] 
presented an optimization technique to enhance the usability 
of CAPTCHA that are based on the crowding character 
together like Google CAPTCHA. The author has designed 
a 3-stage algorithm to optimize the usability while retaining 
the security of the CAPTCHA. The algorithm is based on 
the optimization rules that tells the system to decide what 
should be the optimized characters for a given confusing 
character or set of characters, e.g. “vv” should be replaced 
as “vk”, then refining the optimized text that tells the system 
to refine the optimized text so that after picking the non-
confusing characters still the problem is remained, e.g. in 
“cl” replace with m  can further create confining as “am” and 
finally position the optimized characters. Taal et al. [70] pro-
posed an reCAPTCHA assisted OCR for Devanagari text. 
The design achieved 99.53% accuracy for OCR only and 
99.61% accuracy for OCR integrated with reCAPTCHA. 
The authors used 2-layer Convolution Neural Network for 
feature learning integrated with 2 Layer Support Vector 
Machine (SVM) for classification. Saini and Bala [55] pre-
sented a new Gurumukhi script-based CAPTCHA for bot 
protection on the internet. A few advantages are discussed 
of Gurumukhi CAPTCHA like that can be good for Punjabi 
users, no need to learn Punjabi as the on-screen keyboard is 
given in the design as given in the screen keyboard in the 
design. 41 letters are used to design CAPTCHA random, so 
the number of possible CAPTCHAs is very large, with the 
inclusion of audio. The authors reported the average time to 
solve CAPTCHA 14.07 s and the success rate for humans is 
75%. Bursztein et al. [12, 15] proposed an enhancement in 
Google CAPTCHA scheme by making it more usable 
scheme. The usability is increased 6.7% from the previous 
design and it is reported 95.3%. The author applied a lot of 
changes in visual features (character set, change counts of 
characters, font size, font families, foreground colors, back -
ground colors), anti-segmentation features (character over -
lapping, random dot size, random dot counts, line types, line 
counts, line widths, line position, similar foreground/back -
ground colors), anti-recognition features (rotated character 
counts, rotated character degrees, vertical shifting sizes, 
character size variations, character distortions). Ramaiah and 
1119 A Systematic Survey on CAPTCHA Recognition: Types, Creation and Breaking Techniques  
1 3
Govindaraju [52] proposed asigma lognormal model for 
character level CAPTCHA. The author designed a new char -
acter level CAPTCHA because word level CAPTCHA is 
vulnerable to dictionary attack. The novel idea is to use the 
accents of different persons’ handwritten characters. All the 
characters are then concatenated with each other by curve 
fitting. The use of accents makes a single word with a few 
styles. Human accuracy is 90.49% and machine accuracy is 
almost nil. Alsuhibany [7 ] made efforts to define a bench-
mark for designing usable and secure text-based 
CAPTCHAs. The author proposed core features and distor -
tion features to make a CAPTCHA scheme more usable and 
secure. Yu et al. [80] proposed Chinese language-based 
CAPTCHA along with a comparison with Roman based 
English CAPTCHA. The main objective is to do an usability 
analyses on the Chinese characters. The usability is evalu-
ated on terms of 3 independent variables effectiveness (aver -
age solving time), efficiency (correction rate) and satisfac-
tion (online questionnaire and face to face interview). They 
highlighted the major difference between cognition process 
of solving English and Chinese CAPTCHA’s as the Chinese 
character set is much large and not as simple to recognize as 
English letters are. The study includes random English char -
acters, frequent English words, random Chinese characters, 
frequent Chinese words, less frequents Chinese characters, 
similar form Chinese characters, similar initial consonants 
and similar simple or compound vowels Chinese characters. 
The four types of fonts Yahei, Songti, Heiti and Caoshu are 
used in the Chinese CAPTCHA schemes. The last font has 
the least readability. No trouble is reported in identifying the 
character by the humans in both languages. Kumari et al. 
[38] proposed a new CAPTCHA design based on new char -
acter locations for enhancing the security of the existing 
CAPTCHA. The major goal of this new design is to reduce 
the time for users spending to solve the CAPTCHA. The 
study has shown that a person can take almost 1–20 s to 
solve a CAPTCHA around the world every day. So, 200 mil-
lion CAPTCHA is being solved taking 150,000 h of each 
day. The solution is to save this time by applying time vali-
dations between random CAPTCHA images which comes 
by clicking reset button. So, when a user clicks in the text 
box for CAPTCHA entry a counter starts, and a new 
CAPTCHA image is automatically coming after the counter 
finishes in the case of CAPTCHA is unsolved by the user. 
Alsuhibany [8 ] developed an Arabic handwritten CAPTCHA 
for cyber security. It is easier for Arab users to solve Arabic 
CAPTCHA. The images are generated from KHATT data-
base of offline Arabic handwritten text. Various distortions 
are applied to 28 Arabic characters. Arabic characters are 
special features as they have different shapes of a single 
character when it used in beginning, middle and end of 
word. The overlapping of characters in writing style of Ara -
bic language also makes it secure scheme. Also, the author has used the less mature Arabic OCR as an advantage for 
this new CAPTCHA. The algorithm contains 6 steps. In the 
first step pseudo word generation a 3–8 random letters word 
is generated, that are converted to Unicode. In the second 
step “Converting Characters to Unicode”. In the third step, 
selecting a writer the algorithm selects a specific or random 
writer to generate CAPTCHA. In the fourth step, selecting 
a Character Image, the image of each character is returned 
to make handwritten Arabic word. The background of height 
200 pixels and random width including several handwritten 
character images is also prepared in this step. In fifth step, 
Detecting Joint Points and Connection  the algorithm con-
nects the characters to make a complete word. In the final 
step Binarization the image is converted to B&W. Distortion 
of black’s arcs, white arcs or combination of black and white 
arcs of different width and length are used. For testing 
Tesseract, ABBYYY and Newocr.com engine issued, and 
they are failed in recognition the characters. The robustness 
of CAPTCHA is 98.3% and Table  8, show the various 
parameters for these text-based CAPTCHA designs:
7.2  Breaking of Text Based CAPTCHAs
In this section, the authors have discussed various breaking 
techniques for CAPTCHA proposed by different scholars. 
Gimpy and EZ Gimpy CAPTCHA were mainly text-based 
CAPTCHAs. Gimpy CAPTCHA was difficult as compare to 
EZ Gimpy that is why it is known as EZ (easy). As in Fig.  3 
[A] Gimpy CAPTCHA displays approximate 10 words, and 
the user is asked to correctly type 3 words, but the EZ Gimpy 
CAPTCHA displays only a single word with cluttered back -
ground. Mori and Malik [ 44] found that Gimpy CAPTCHA 
uses 411 words and EZ Gimpy uses 561 words. Mori and 
Malik [44] have proposed two algorithms to break these 
CAPTCHAs. They optimized the shape context matching 
technique for matching EZ Gimpy words. They developed 
novel algorithms for breaking these CAPTCHAs. For EZ 
Gimpy CAPTCHA, they proposed 3 steps algorithm. The 
first step performs quick tests to hypothesize locations of 
letters in the range. In the second step, they extract strings 
of these hypothesized letters with a direct acyclic graph that 
form candidate words. They use tri-grams for further mini-
mize the data set at this stage. And in the third step, that 
choose most likely word(s) by evaluating matching score for 
each of these words. The success rate for EZ Gimpy is 92%. 
For Gimpy CAPTCHA they proposed an algorithm that 
extracts the whole word at once not by individual letters. The 
algorithm success rate for finding ≥ 1 word(s) in Gimpy 
CAPTCHA is 92%, ≥ 2 words is 75% and 3 words is 33%. 
Moy et al. [45] again broke EZ Gimpy and a newer version 
of Gimpy CAPTCHA that is Gimpy r  with success rate of 
99% and 78%, respectively. EZ-Gimpy is a collection of dic-
tionaries based on 561 words and Gimpy-r produces 
1120 M. Kumar et al.
1 3Table 8  Generation of Text Based CAPTCHAs
Authors Scheme Usability/security in % Usability enchancements Secuirty enhancments Language Generation technique
Chew and Baird [20] Baffle text 89/89 Optimal presentation of text Noise: occlusion by random 
shapes, Oblitrate parts of 
image
Anti Recognition: Image 
Masking with AND, OR
Anti Segmentation: Overlap-
ping of Random ShapesEnglish Gestalt-motivated image-
masking and Degradation
Rusu and Govindaraju [53] Handwritten CAPTCHA 82/88–97 Removal of g,q,r,n,e and c 
lettersNoise: lines, grids, 
arcs,circles,
Antisegmenation: touching 
and overlapping characters
Anti-Noramlization: Vari-
able stroke, widh, slope 
and rotation
Dictionary attack: confusing 
and complex characters w 
and mEnglish Handwritten Characters Based
Chellapilla et al. [17] MSN CAPTCHA 90/65–100 Optimum level of local and 
global warping with thin 
and thick arcs interactionAnti Recognition: Local and 
Global Warping with
Anti Segmenation: Thin and 
Thick ArcsEnglish Random Noise and Warping
Chow et al. [22] Clickable CAPTCHA 95/ 99.98 Just clikcing is required Anti Recognition: Rotation
Anti Segementation: 
Overlapping and Touching 
Characters
Dictionary attack: non 
English and English words 
are mixedEnglish Multiple text CAPTCHAs
Thomas et al. [72] Mixed Text Synthetic Hand-
written CAPTCHA77/99.99 Simple English Words Noise: Background Filled 
with Letters
Anti Recognition: Broken 
Handwritten Letters
Anti Segmenation: Touching 
CharactersEnglish Character Level Perturbation
Imsamai and Phimoltares 
[35]3D CAPTCHA 100/NM Simle English Letters with 
some special symbolsNoise: Lines, Dots, Color 
background, Scaling, 
Texture,
Anti-Recognition: Random 
Rotation, Special Char -
actres,
Anti Segmentation: Overlap-
ping, Different Shades and 
Colors
Dictionary Attack: Random 
CharactersEnglish 3D Rendering
1121 A Systematic Survey on CAPTCHA Recognition: Types, Creation and Breaking Techniques  
1 3Table 8  (continued)
Authors Scheme Usability/security in % Usability enchancements Secuirty enhancments Language Generation technique
Imsamai and Phimoltares 
[35]STE3D-CAP 100/100 Easy to see with 3D Stereo-
scopic Display GlassesNoise: 3D Noise
Anti Recognition: 3D Letters
Anti Segmenation: 3D ImageEnglish Stereoscopic 3D Images
Rusu et al. [54] Synthetic Handwritten 
CAPTCHA82/NM US City names and mean-
ingful wordsNoise: arcs, waves
Anti Recognition: Random 
handwrittten characters
Anti Segmentation: Verticle/ 
Horizontal Overlapping, 
Displacement and Frag-
mentationEnglish Getault and Geon Theory 
trnasformations
Handwritten images
Ramaiah and Govindaraju 
[52]Sigma-Lognormal 
CAPTCHA90.40/NM Simple English letters Anti-Recognition: Unsuper -
vised selection of character 
for more variety of same 
letters
Anti-Segmentation: 
Supervised selection of 
characters including slant, 
direction, and curvatureEnglish Curve Fitting and Use of 
Accents
Yalamanchili and Rao [74] DevaCAPTCHA NM Devanagari Words Noise: arcs, jaws,
Anti-recognition: different 
font size
Anti-segmentation: vertical 
overlappingDevanagari Simple Image Combination
Alsuhibany [6] Crowding Character 
Together CAPTCHA`NM English words Anti-Recognition: Random 
rotation and warping
Anti-Segmentation: Over -
lapping and touching 
charactersEnglish Text Optimizer
Optimize Usability
Replacing confusing char -
acters with non-confusing 
characters
Bursztein et al. [12, 15] Google CAPTCHA NM/95.3 English/Pseudo words
Or
Random numbersAnti-Segmentation: Overlap-
ping, Dots, Lines, Similar 
foreground/background 
color)
Anti-Recognition: Rotation, 
Vertical shift, Font size, 
character distortion)English Random Distortions
Alsuhibany [7] Easy and Secure
Fast
Hard
Annoying95/100
95/98
3/100
NM/100Alpha and digits Noise: Color background
Anti-Recognition: Rotation, 
Shifting, Font Size
Anti-segmentation: Overlap-
ping, Lines, CollapsingEnglish Core Features and Distortions
1122 M. Kumar et al.
1 3
challenges that are a combination of 4 random letters among 
19 letters. The challenges are hard to break with clutter back -
ground and distorted letters. The EZ-gimpy is handled with 
a template image because of very small database and Gimpy-
r is handled with the letter segmentation approach due to 
large possible combinations. The author used a concept of 
cores (3 most distinct circular of radius 16-pixel areas in the 
image and 24 mini patches for breaking EZ-Gimpy. To break 
the Gimpy-r  challenges the author proposed a novel tech-
nique of mesh generation and global/local distortion 
removal. The author claimed that these techniques can be 
used to remove all kinds of distortions in the text images. 
Chellapilla and Simard [18] developed a method to break 
some popular CAPTCHAs like Mailblocks (88.8%), Register 
(95.4%), Yahoo/EZ Gimpy (90.3%), Yahoo version2(95.2%), 
Ticketmaster (82.3%), Goole/Gmail (89.3%). They followed 
a segmentation step and then a recognition step for break all 
these HIPs. For Mailblocks the red channel is selected, then 
binarizes the image and then after erosion extract the largest 
connected components. Too large components were divided 
into 2 or 3 components. Vertically overlapped half characters 
are merged in the last. For Register.com the images are 
smoothed, binarized and 5 largest connected components are 
identified. Yahoo/EZ Gimpy (No mesh) images are con-
verted to grayscale images, threshold to black and white and 
select large connected components. Image is converted to 
grayscale, threshold to black and white, remove vertical and 
horizontal lines that don’t have neighboring pixels and 
finally select Connected Components. In case of White 
mesh, the image is converted to grayscale, threshold into 
black and white, add black pixels in white line locations if 
there exist neighboring pixels and finally select large CCs. 
For Ticketmaster, the image is converted to grayscale, then 
it is threshold to B&W, dilate and then erode the image and 
finally select the large Connected Components. Chellapilla 
and Simard [18 ] used the same attack to break Yahoo version 
2 and Google/Gmail HIP. Aboufadel et al. [ 1] developed a 
new method to break a popular CAPTCHA that was known 
as Holiday Inn Priority CAPTCHA. It is a combination of 5 
letters contain lower and upper alphabets and digits. First, 
they rotated the challenge image to make it horizontally 
straight. In the next step they segment the characters in 5 
images of 30X30 pixels. Finally, they used the Haar Wavelet 
filters to recognize the characters and achieved 100% accu-
racy in identifying the characters. Their method was also 
applied on General Electric CAPTCHA and a CAPTCHA 
used by Chicago Cubs. Yan and Ahmad [101] designed algo-
rithms to break four CAPTCHA design of CAPTCHAser -
vice.org. These four schemes were word_image (six letter 
dictionary word), random_letter_images (six random letter 
image) user_string_image (max 15 distorted letters of the 
user supplied string). The author segmented the challenges 
with vertical segmentation and novel Snake Segmentation Table 8  (continued)
Authors Scheme Usability/security in % Usability enchancements Secuirty enhancments Language Generation technique
Yu et al. [80] Chinese CAPTCHA 98.44/NM 304Chinese letters Noise: Dots and Arcs
Anti-Recognition: Warping
Anti-Segmentation: Chinese 
Letters FeaturesChinese Chinese Letters Scalabality
Saini and Bala [55] Gurumukhi CAPTCHA 75% 41 Gurmukhi letters Noise: Dots, Lines, Color
Anti-Recognition: Similar 
Background and Fore-
ground Color
Anti-segmentation: Touch-
ingPunjabi Random Distortions
Alsuhibany [8] Arabic Handwritten 
CAPTCHA83.88% 28 Arabic letters Anti-recognition: Handwrit-
ten Characters
Anti-segmentation: Arcs 
(white, black)Arabic Random Handwritten Letters
1123 A Systematic Survey on CAPTCHA Recognition: Types, Creation and Breaking Techniques  
1 3
Algorithm. The recognition is done by performing statistical 
analysis on the characters. The CAPTCHA breaking method 
not only applied to CAPTCHAservice.org scenes, but also 
BoBlock, BotCheck and HumanVerfiy schemes are also vul-
nerable to this attack. The success rate of this attack is 100% 
for all the schemes. The countermeasures are also discussed 
in the paper. Ahmad and Yan [2 ] discussed the role of colors 
in CAPTCHA design with respect to usability and security. 
A few color CAPTCHAs are broken using their novel algo-
rithms. Gimpy-r (81%), EZ-Gimpy (100%), LinkedIn and 
FreeCap (100%), BotBlock (100%), Megaupload (63.7%), 
BotDetect (100%), phpCAPTCHA.org (95–100%) and Cryp -
tograph (100%). The author used a new Color Filling Seg-
mentation (CFS) technique for segmentation for solving 
color CAPTCHAs. The algorithm fills every large connected 
component with different color. They also proposed some 
guidelines for designing color CAPTCHAs. Yan and Ahmad 
[77] broke Microsoft CAPTCHA with a novel technique 
with accuracy of 60% in just 80 ms. The author binarizes the 
image, fixing the broken characters, segmented the image 
vertically. After this the Color filling Segmentation is 
applied to fill each segment with different color. A lot of 
thick arcs remain in the challenge image that are removed 
with some observations like pixel count, location, shape 
(without circle). Before recognition some of the connected 
characters are present in the challenges that are removed by 
pixel counts. The author also discussed the cases where the 
algorithm fills to segment the challenge and strength and 
weaknesses of the Microsoft CAPTCHA. Huang et al. [33] 
developed an enhanced segmentation algorithm to segment 
Yahoo and MSN CAPTCHA schemes, and they achieved a 
segmentation rate of 79% and 76% on MSN and Yahoo 
CAPTCHA, respectively. Two new algorithms were devel-
oped, namely, projection profiles and middle-axis point 
separation for segmentation of line clutters that are as thick 
as the characters and they are of varying lengths. These clut-
ters can be intersected or not intersected with characters. 
With projection profiles the pixel counts are projected of 
each column on the x -axis and using a middle axis point 
separation method the cutting lines are generated that cut 
segment the characters vertically. Bursztein  [14] developed 
a new DeCAPTCHA tool for breaking 13 most popular 
CAPTCHAs like Baidu, Blizzard, Ebay, Google, 
reCAPTCHA, etc. and they found that most of the schemes 
are easily broken with their novel attack. A lot of guidelines 
are proposed to design an anti-recognition (small char set, 
not use distortion, use rotation in conjunction, etc.) and anti-
segmentation (not use complex background, use large lines, 
match line slope, match line color with text, use collapsing, 
etc.) scheme. The accuracy ranges from 2 to 73% is achieved 
in breaking of all these 13 schemes. Gao et al. [27] devel-
oped an algorithm to break 5 Hollow CAPTCHAs schemes 
used by Yahoo, Tencent, Sina, CmPay and Baidu. Gao et al. [27] achieved 36%, 89%, 59%, 66% and 51% accuracy in 
breaking these CAPTCHAs. The attack contains image bina-
rization, repair contour lines, CFS to fill hollow parts, noise 
component removal. The contour repairing is a novel tech-
nique explained by the authors. The author also suggested 
guidelines to make the design stronger. Bursztein et al. [12, 
15] developed a generic algorithm to break 6 popular 
CAPTCHAs schemes (Baidu 54.38%,CNN 48.54%; eBay 
48.61%; reCAPTCHA 19.74; Wikipedia 26.36% and Yahoo 
5.33%. The algorithm is not based on classical segmentation 
followed by recognition method, but it does both these tasks 
simultaneously. The algorithm has four major components 
Cut-Point detector, Slicer, Scorer and Arbiter. The Cut-Point 
detector generates a few possible cuts that are the basis for 
segmentation. The cuts are derived from inflection points of 
two curves. The curves are made up of examining second 
derivative of curves generated by following the top and bot-
tom pixels of the CAPTCHA. The slicer applies heuristics 
to extract the meaning full segments on the cut points and 
build a graph. The Scorer traverses the graph and applies 
OCR to each meaningful segment with the help of KNN. 
Finally, the Arbitrator using the Ensemble Learning 
Approach selects the final value for the CAPTCHA. The 
algorithm decreases a lot of cut points by applying some 
filters and handles the occluding lines with by adding a new 
character class to the KNN. The author also pinpoints some 
areas of improvements, but they think that some design 
improvements can make the CAPTCHA stronger like adding 
an occluding line of sine wave shapes or blobs. The charac-
terpositions are linear in all CAPTHCAs, somaking the posi-
tion of each character at random location both vertically and 
horizontally a defeat the algorithm. Bansal et al. [9 ] pre-
sented a novel approach to break visual CAPTCHA (EZ-
GIMPY’s four schemes simple background, back mesh back -
ground, white mesh background, and loosely connected 
characters). They reported 97.90% success rate of recogni-
tion. The model uses preprocessing (image binarization, low 
pass filtering, dilation, etc.), character segmentation, feature 
extraction (number of holes, height of characters, maximum 
number of white-black transitions, light-fall and nature of 
vertical stroke) a finally HMM (Hidden Morkov Model) for 
recognition characters. Hussain et al. [34] proposed a novel 
CAPTCHA breaking technique for recognition of merged 
characters. The proposed algorithm to recognize merged 
characters are having 6 steps. The algorithm starts by taking 
an input image that is preprocessed (no noise is present) and 
in the 1st step set Left and Right Margins the algorithm finds 
the left and right margin of the CAPTCHA. In the 2nd step 
place window on initial point a window of size t  (minimum 
character size in CAPTCHA) is placed on the top left of the 
window. In the 3rd step (Move Window Vertically Down-
wards) the window is moved vertically downward one by 
one pixel until it reaches the background pixel means it starts 
1124 M. Kumar et al.
1 3
crossing the foreground character. In the 4th step (Increase 
Window Size ) the size of the window is increasing in length 
one by one pixel until it reaches the character max length 
and the final window is sent to the classifier for recognition. 
In the 5th step (Store Results) the recognized character is 
stored and if not then null is stored. In the last step the above 
steps are repeated until the right margin is reached. Algwil 
et al. [4 ] made an analysis of the viability of Chinese lan-
guage-based CAPTCHA. The authors are motivated towards 
this new design due to the scalability of the Chinese charac-
ter set. The Chinese language character set is very large in 
number (3375 classes) as compare to Roman counterparts 
(26 classes). It is proven that a computer can recognize sin-
gle Roman character with a 100% success rate. Algwil et al. 
[4] reported that this success rate drops 60% in the worst 
case, but the human success rate also drops to 10%. The 
recognition of the Chinese character set is not tested so the 
author has tried to try this. For this, 3 types of Character 
design are prepared G1 (geometric transformation and ran-
dom warping), G2 (geometric transformation, random warp-
ing, 8 arcs of 1 pixel wide that are placed on the top of each 
character) and G3 (all distortions of G2 with the arcs are 16). 
To test the designs for anti-recognition Deep Neural Net-
work (DNN) and Multi Column Deep Neural Network 
(MCDNN) are used. The error rate of DNN/MCDNN on G1, 
G2 and G3 are 0.407%, 7.805%, 15.517% and 10.086%, 
respectively. A popular Chinese CAPTCHA, CCAPTCHA 
is also tested with DNN/MCDNN and 0% error rate is 
reported. So, it is concluded that although single Chinese 
character is successfully recognized by the classifier, but it 
is possible to make a better CAPTCHA design with Chinese 
language due to its scalability features. Nguyen [47] devel-
oped an algorithm to break 3 most popular, but similar 3D 
CAPTCHA schemes (Super CAPTCHA, 3dCAPTCHA and 
TeaBag3D 1.2). The authors found very easy weaknesses in 
the design and then attacked these 3 CAPTCHA schemes 
with a success rate of (32% in 3 s, 58% in 4 s and 31% in 4 s) 
for Super CAPTCHA, 3dCAPTCHA and TeaBag3D 1.2, 
respectively. Gao et al. [ 28] presented a generic algorithm 
for breaking almost every type of text CAPTCHA Microsoft 
and Wikipedia (Isolated Schemes), Yahoo and QQ (hollow 
Schemes) and reCAPTCHA and Baidu (CCT Schemes). The 
toolbox uses Log-Gabor 2D filter for directly extracting the 
characters from the CAPTCHA without preprocessing the 
challenge image. The algorithm contains two major steps 
extracting components and partition and recognition. In the 
first step 2D Log Gabor Filter is used to extract character 
component along four directions (0, PI/4, PI/2, 3 × PI/4). In 
the second step the extracted components are recognized by 
K-NN. In this step, the components are numbered and sorted 
with color filling segmentation. A graph is made of the 
choices for which two components can be grouped as a sin-
gle character or not. The authors also reported that the attack is also applicable on broken character schemes like Yandex 
CAPTCHA. In the last, some counter measures are also sug-
gested like overlapping can enhance the security of text 
CAPTCHA. Warping is the best option to make the most 
secure CAPTCHA. The rotation can be useful to make a 
CAPTCHA stronger. Recently Tang et al. [ 41] presented a 
new model for breaking text based CAPTCHA using deep 
learning. They reported a high success rate in breaking 
Roman characters and Chinese CAPTCHAs. The study 
includes 50 web sites CAPTCHAs. Their work is Deep CNN 
based. Breaking techniques of text based CAPTCHAs are 
highlighted in Table  9.
8  Reported Work on Image Based 
CAPTCHAs
8.1  Creation of Image Based CAPTCHAs
The concept of image-based CAPTCHA like BONGO 
method was first proposed by Bongard [11]. It is a visual 
pattern recognition problem. The user is given two blocks 
of some random shapes and finally a random shape is to be 
identified by the user by telling which block it belongs. No 
language requirements are needed to pass the test, but a pro -
gram can be easily trained to solve this kind of visual puzzle. 
Chew and Tygar [21] described using labeled photographs 
to generate a CAPTCHA. Elson et al. [26] generated a data-
base of labeled images by feeding a list of easily illustrated 
words to Google image search. For making it simpler, so 
that bad images are not shown, they make its database small 
that resulted in a weak CAPTCHA. Also, labels are also 
vulnerable to attack on image-based CAPTCHAs. In 2004 
PIX CAPTCHA was proposed by Li [40] as a solution to this 
problem. In this CAPTCHA some label images are picked 
from the database and a choice of 70 options are given to the 
user from which he must pick one. The CAPTCHA is pre-
sented with four pictures related to a common class. But, the 
PIX CAPTCHA had a lot of problems like small database 
only 70 classes are used. If the database is larger than more 
than 70 classes can be handled that make it time consum-
ing. Finally, some images are related to abstract class, so 
the user is frustrated. HotCAPTCHA is also introduced in 
that was based on images. 9 images of humans are presented 
to the user and the user is asked to select a “hot” one. The 
“Beauty” is a subjective concept, so the choice is very con-
fusing for a few cases. Li [40] explained that the CAPTCHA 
is not very popular for most of the websites. Elson et al. 
[26] at Microsoft developed ASIRRA CAPTCHA. It is an 
image-based CAPTCHA. The user is given 12 images and 
is asked to find only cat among 12 images. Image size is 
250 × 250. The images are collected from a large image 
database (3,000,000 images and 10,000 added everyday) of 
1125 A Systematic Survey on CAPTCHA Recognition: Types, Creation and Breaking Techniques  
1 3
Table 9  Breaking Techniques of Text Based CAPTCHAs
Authors Scheme Breaking Rate in % Language Method
Mori and Malik [44] EZ Gimpy 92 English Noise Removal:
Shape Context Matching
Gimpy 33 Extract whole word Using Bigrams
Moy et al. [45] EZ Gimpy 99 English Matching Whole Word by Correlation
Gimpy r 78 Matching sub-Objects by Distortion Estimation
Chellapilla and Simard [18] Mailblocks 88.8 English Noise Removal: Dilation and Erosion
Register 95.4 Segmentation: Largest Connected Components
EZ Gimpy 90.3 Recognition: (CNN)
Yahoo 95.2
Version 2 82.3
Ticketmaster
Google 89.3
Yan and Ahmad [77] MSN 60 English Segmentation: Color Filling and Projection 
Recognition: (CNN)
Aboufadel et al. [1] Holiday Inn Priority CAPTCHA 100 English Segmentation: Vertical
Recognition: Bivariate Haar Wavelet Filter
Yan and Ahmad [78] CAPTCHAservice.org 100 English Segmentation: Vertical Projection
BotCheck Recognition: Pixel Count and Dictionary 
Attack
BotBlock
Human Verify
Ahmad and Yan [2] Gimpy-r 81 English Segmentation: CFS
EZ-Gimpy 100 Recognition: CNN
PhpCAPTCHA.org 95–100
Cryptograph 100
FreeCap 100
LinkedIn 100
Megaupload 63.7
BotDetect 100
Huang et al. [33] Yahoo 76 English Segmentation: Projection and Point Separation
MSN 79
Bursztein et al. [14] Authorize 66 English Noise Removal Line removal
Baidu 5 Segmentation: CFS
Blizzard
CAPTCHA.net
CNN
Digg
eBay
Megaupload
NIH70
73
16
20
43
93
72Recognition kNN and SVM
Reddit 42
Skyrock 2
Slashdot 35
Wikipedia 25
Gao et al. [27] Yahoo 36 English Noise Removal: Image Binarization
Tencent 89
Sina 59 Segmentation: CFS
CmPay 66
Baidu 51 Recognition: CNN
1126 M. Kumar et al.
1 3
petfindder.com. The author reported a quick response time 
15 s to solve it. ASIRRA is secure CAPTCHA from a few 
aspects. The design of ASIRRA is secured from the Brute 
Force attack by using the use of the token bucket algorithm. 
Further, ASIRRA also maintains a two-token bucket, one for 
per IP and one for per session. This technique saves it in the 
sharing IP address environment. The designers of ASIRRA 
also made it more useful and more accessible using their 
novel partial credit algorithm. That, they use the concept of 
intermediate verified users. This algorithm made a scope of 
minor errors for the humans so that even after a wrong selec-
tion they are not treated as bots. Also, with PCA and Tokens 
the success rate of bots is also controlled almost zero. Shi-
rali-Shahreza [58- 60] and Shirali-Shahreza [61- 65] have pre-
sented a few new image-based CAPTCHAs like CAPTCHA 
for children in which the user is given some images of object 
like vehicles, animals etc. The user is given audio based (in English language) question to select an object to pass 
the test. The images are downloaded online from Yahoo 
etc. This is very effective for such systems that does not 
support keyboard. In Collage CAPTCHA, the images are 
presented to the user, but this time the question is rendered 
on the screen rather than in audio. In the advanced Collage 
CAPTCHA, the images are given in two sets. Left side dis-
plays the goal image and the user are asked to pick all the 
images on the right side that belong to the left side image. 
So, the numbers of clicks are more as compared to the previ -
ous CAPTCHA schemes. In online collage CAPTCHA, the 
picture is retrieved online and otherwise it is same as collage 
CAPTCHA. A photo-based authentication was proposed by 
Yardi et al. [79]. It is known as Lineup CAPTCHA. The user 
is given a photo and asked to identify the person in the photo. 
The images of persons are taken from the Facebook account 
of the user. The persons that are being asked to belong the Table 9  (continued)
Authors Scheme Breaking Rate in % Language Method
Bursztein et al. [12, 15] Baidu 36.58 English Cut point generation
CNN 48.54
eBay 48.61 Recognition: OCR
reCAPTCHA 19.74
Wikipedia 26.36
Yahoo 5.33
Bansal and Gupta EZ Gimpy 97 English Noise Removal: Erosion, dilation, AND opera-
tion
Simple
Black Mesh Segmentation: connected components
White Mesh Feature Extraction: height of characters, Light 
fall, number of holes, vertical strokes
Loosely Connected Characters Recognition: Hidden Morkov Model
Hussain et al. [34] Microsoft CAPTCHA NM English Segmentation: windows scaling
Recognition: SVM
Algwil et al. [4] Chinese CAPTCHA 100 Chinese Noise Removal: binarization and blurring
Recognition: DNN and MCDNN
Gao et al. [28] reCPTCHA
Yahoo
Baidu
Wikipedia
QQ
Microsoft
Amazon
Taobao
Sina
Ebay77.2
5.0
44.2
23.8
56.0
16.2
25.8
23.4
9.4
58.8English Segmentation: Log Gabor 2D Filter
Recognition: KNN
Nguyen et al. [47] Super CAPTCHA
3D CAPTCHA
TeaBagCAPTCHA 1.232
58
31English Segmentation: vertical and diagonal segmenta-
tion, Pixel Processing, horizontal and vertical 
scanning, line distance and line gradient, 
connected pixels
Tang et al. [41] Roman CAPTCHA
Chinese CAPTCHANM Roman
ChienseDeep CNN
1127 A Systematic Survey on CAPTCHA Recognition: Types, Creation and Breaking Techniques  
1 3
group of the user. The security of the scheme is enhanced by 
setting the level of the questions being asked. Like what is 
happening in the photograph, etc. The authors assume that 
to solve such kind of authentication requires a lot of effort. 
Almazyad et al. [5 ] utilized Multi Model CAPTCHA. In this 
scheme the user is given an image with four text labels on 
it. The labels are associated with the image, but only one is 
a perfect match to the image. This perfect label must input 
by the user to pass the challenge. For security, the labels are 
embedded in the background of the image, but these are very 
easily extracted from the image as the color of the text is 
same for all the labels. Font of the labels is same but not the 
straight as Times New Roman. Segmentation of the font is 
straight forward. Another image-based CAPTCHA’s that is 
known as Implicit CAPTCHA and Drawing CAPTCHA was 
proposed by Shirali-Shahreza [58- 60] and Shirali-Shahreza 
[61-65]. Implicit CAPTCHA is questions-based CAPTCHA. 
The user is given a question in the image, e.g. to click on the 
top of the hill, etc. the scheme requires the use of the English 
language. On the other hand, Drawing CAPTCHA does not 
require any language proficiency. In this scheme, the user is 
given a screen with noisy background with a few dots. The 
user is asked to connect certain dost on the screen. So, it 
is a mixture of image based and puzzle-based CAPTCHA. 
Various image based schemes are highlighted in Table  10.
8.2  Breaking Techniques of Image CAPTCHAs
The ASIRRA CAPTCHA is broken with the success are 
about 82.7% by Golle [29]. The author used a SVM classi-
fier that extracts the color features (F1, F2, F3) and texture 
features (G1). For the color features, the author uses HSV 
model and images are divided into cells. The author said 
that as the number of images in the classifier is increasing the accuracy is also increasing. The author also pointed that 
the PCA is also helpful in breaking the CAPTCHA. But the 
Token Buck et al. gorithm is decreasing the success rate of 
the classifier. Even the use of PCA and Token Bucket does 
not stop the classifier to break the ASIRRA CAPTCHA. 
Polakis et al. [49] designed an attack on the photo-based 
CAPTCHA. They reported that a determined attacker can 
achieve 100% success rate of breaking such Social Authenti -
cation like Facebook. Even a casual attacker can break these 
challenges with success rate of 22%. They also highlighted 
a lot of weaknesses of Facebook’s social authentication like 
it requires at least 50 friends to present the challenge, the 
user’s friend must be tagged (this tagging is not very accu-
rate most of the time, so the usability is also very low for a 
legitimate user). The time of solving this challenge is 5 min 
that is very long as compare to another CAPTCHA’s. 80% 
of the challenges contain such photos in which the person 
is not clearly visible. Also, some of the challenges do not 
contain even a single face to be identified. The challenge is 
presented if the user is logging from a different geographi-
cal location or a new device is used to access the account. 
Finally, the challenge presents the user with an option to 
bypass the test by providing their date of birth. The data 
is obtained very easily by the attacker because the profile 
contain date of birth, etc. The author tried to break Social 
Authentication in two ways: casual attack and determined 
attack. In casual attack the attacker can gain victim’s friend 
list that is publicly available (47% of the users) and a deter -
mined attacker can gain 84% by issuing a friend request to 
the victim’s friends. The user ID and names of the friends 
are retrieved by the Facebook database. The next photos are 
stored with a user ID and names by accessing the albums of 
the target’s friends. Then by using face detection software 
the faces are detected. The faces are labeled with the tag 
Table 10  Generation of image based CAPTCHAs
Authors Schemeb Usability Enchancements Usability (%) Security (%) Language
Bongard [11] BONGO Simple Shapes 100 100 English
Elson et al. [26] ASIRRA CAPTCHA Only Cat and Dog Images 99.96 100 English
Chew and Tygar [21] Anomalies Image CAPTCHA Lableed Images 95 100 Independent
Li [40] PIX CAPTCHA Only 70 Choices 90 100 English
Li [40] HOT CAPTCHA User friendly choices(beauty) 95 100 English
Shirali-Shahreza [61-65] Implicit CAPTCHA Simple clicking is required 100 100 English
Shirali-Shahreza [61-65] Drawing CAPTCHA Simple drawing is required 100 100 Independent
Shirali-Shahreza [61-65] CAPTCHA for Children Simple images of toys 100 100 English
Shirali-Shahreza [58-60] Collage CAPTCHA Larger but easy images are given 100 100 English
Shirali-Shahreza 61-65] Advanced collage CAPTCHA Simple matching of images is required 100 100 English
Shirali-Shahreza [58-60] Online collage CAPTCHA Online simple images 100 100 English
Mehrnejad et al. [42] Multiple SEIMCHA Simple drawings 90 17.5 English
Almazyad et al. [5] Multi modal CAPTCHA Clear object and label are given 100 100 English
Yardi et al. [79] Lineup CAPTCHA Facebook friends images are used 100 100 English
1128 M. Kumar et al.
1 3
information. Finally, the names are classified with k-NN 
classifier with k = 3. The latest indivisible CAPTCHA is 
announced by Google that is free from every text, image, 
video and puzzle. It just requires a click of the mouse by the 
user. It is very famous across the websites. Sivakorn et al. 
[67, 68] proposed the first successful attack on Google Invis-
ible CAPTCHA is reported. Google reCAPTCHA is based 
on Google’s advanced risk analysis system. Based on the 
level of confidence assigned to a specific request this system 
will select which type of challenge to present the user. The 
collage is presented from simple to hard as follows: First the 
new user-friendly CAPTCHA is presented to the user. After 
clicking the checkbox in the widget if the advanced risk 
analysis system has high confidence, then the checkbox is 
changed to a tick. If the confidence is not high, then accord-
ing to the level of confidence one of the following versions 
of reCAPTCHA is represented as shown below:
• Image reCAPTCHA
• Distorted one word
• Scanned word
• Distorted two word
• Fallback CAPTCHA
The author tried to do a fake click on the Google 
reCAPTCHA and they succeeded in that. They highlighted 
a number of weaknesses in the Google’s advanced risk 
analyses in term of browsing history (repeated on 9th day), 
genuine account and fake accounts (by bots), Geo locations 
(fraud countries), no detection of Automation of browser 
actives, mouse behavior (java script based click events), no 
reputation of cookies files, no site restriction of (number 
of requested per IP address), etc. The author also proposed 
a semantic based attack on the Google Image CAPTCHA. 
They used Google Reverse Image Search for image guess. 
They also strengthen their algorithm using a lot of Image 
annotation generator like Clarifai, NeuralTalk, etc. They 
developed their tag classifier and then attacked image 
CAPTCHA with the success rate of 70.78%. Another kind 
of image CAPTCHA is also proposed by Facebook that is like Google reCAPTCHA. The same technique is also used 
to break Facebook image CAPTCHA with a success rate 
of 83.5%. Breaking techniques of image based schemes are 
highlighted in Table  11.
9  Reported Work on Puzzle Based CAPTCHA
9.1  Creation of Puzzle Based CAPTCHAs
Shirali-Shahreza [59] have also proposed a question–based 
CAPTCHA. It is a mixture of text based and image-based 
CAPTCHA. A simple arithmetic problem is given to the user 
that contains text and images. For example, “There are 5 
bananas and 7 apples, then how many total fruits are there?” 
Again, the user is required to proficient in English language. 
The challenges are not made of large database so the proba-
bility to solve this scheme is very high. Yamamoto et al. [76] 
proposed SS-CAPTCHA. A few sentences are presented to 
the users that are made of natural language sentences to the 
machine-translated sentences. The user is asked to select 
the one which is created by the human not by the machine. 
The user must be very proficient in the English. A machine 
translation program is used to translate natural sentences 
from the non-mother tongue into a mother-tongue language. 
Yamamoto et al. [75] developed a Four Panel CAPTCHA. 
It is a funny CAPTCHA because the user must be able to 
understand the humor. The challenge is made of four-panel 
cartoon images, but not arranged in order. To pass the chal-
lenge the user must arrange these panels in an order. With 4 
panels there are a chance to pass the test by a bot with 1/24 
probability. It is time consuming as well as space consum-
ing CAPTCHA scheme. It also requires a lot of dynamic 
database that is not possible. Mohamed et al. [43] a new kind 
of CAPTCHA is developed at the University of Alabama at 
Birmingham. Dynamic Cognitive Game CAPTCHA. It is 
the solution of relay attacks on the human interactive proofs. 
It is categorized as a puzzle-based CAPTCHA. It is a set of 4 
games Animal Game, Parking Game, Shape Game and Ships 
Game. In all the games user has a target object on which 
Table 11  Breaking Techniques of Image Based CAPTCHAs
Authors Scheme Breaking rate Language Technique
Golle [29] ASIRRA 
CAPTCHA82.7% English Feature Extraction (Color and Texture)
Classification: SVM
Polakis et al. [49] Facebook CAPTCHA 100% English Face detection:face.com
Classification:kNN
Sivakorn et al.67 [68, ] Google Image CAPTCHA 70.78% English Image Collection:Google reverse
Classification: tag classification
Sivakorn et al. [67, 68] Facebook CAPTCHA 83.5% English Image Collection:Google reverse
Classification: tag classification
Sivakorn et al. [67, 68] Invisible CAPTCHA 77% Independent Fake click implementation
1129 A Systematic Survey on CAPTCHA Recognition: Types, Creation and Breaking Techniques  
1 3
answer object must be dragged. The answer object can be 
moved on the activity area. The user can move the answer 
object in the 8 possible directions. The user is presented 
with only one game at a time to pass the test. The size of the 
game is 360 × 130 so it does not consume much space. The 
author has tested its game in three different conditions i.e. 
high latency relay, small game relay and low latency relay. 
The author has succeeded in finding the difference between 
normal conditions and these three attacking conditions. 
Although there are some limitations of DCG CAPTCHA 
like these are not designed for touch screen devices, etc. yet 
these are very effective in guessing relay attacks. Various 
puzzle based schemes are highlighted in Table  12.
9.2  Breaking Techniques Puzzle Bases CAPTCHAs
Although no work have been reported for breaking these 
puzzle based CAPTCHAs. It seems that it is not required 
at all. It is clear that designing of these puzzles and that 
makes the database very small. Such schemes can be com-
promised very easily. These schemes become very difficult 
to solve when images are used with them. Also these make 
the user very confused. On the other hand these schemes 
are not being used by most of the web sites due to the long 
solving time by the user.
10  Reported Work on Audio CAPTCHA
10.1  Creation of Audio Based CAPTCHAs
Holman et al. [32] proposed a new version of CAPTCHA 
that are more accessible for visually impaired users and it 
is equally usable for both the users with and without visu -
ally impairments. The CAPTCHA is considering the mix of 
both pictures and their relating sounds. The user is given a 
picture and a sound that represents the picture object. The 
user must select the correct list item from the drop-down 
list that matches the image or sound to pass the test. The 
images belong to 4 classes’ musical instruments, animals, 
transportations and weather. Sauer et al. [56, 57] proposed 
as HIPUU (Human Interaction Proof Universally Usable). 
In HIPUU the usability is 90% as the images and sounds are 
very easy to understand by the users. But from the security of this scheme is not very high as the images are very easily 
identified by the programs. Tam et al. [71] designed a new 
CAPTCHA to make the progress rate at least 70% and that 
sound is not simply broken by the ASR framework. The 
author uses audio that is made of phrases rather than text, 
sound or any single sound object. The author believes that 
human is more comfortable in understanding phrases rather 
than isolated words. Additionally, the phrases are rendered 
as old radio program sounds that are of poor quality and dif-
ficult to transcribe by ASR systems. Bigham and Cavender 
[10] proposed a new version of audio-based CAPTCHA that 
combined playback controls and answer box control into 
one control for optimizing the performance of the classi-
cal audio-based CAPTCHA. The success rate is 68.5% for 
this new design. The design is an old one but with more 
control of the playing audio. So, this new audio CAPTCHA 
is for enhancing the usability of the audio CAPTCHA. Shi-
rali-Shahreza et al. [65] designed Spoken CAPTCHA. The 
Scheme is designed for blind users who cannot respond to 
images or text. The scheme works as follows: a word from 
the database is given as audio sound to the user and user is 
asked to say the word. The user response is then sent to the 
server for analyses of file. The server decides that the sound 
is from a human or machine, if the voice is from the user 
and correct then the challenge is passed. Lazar et al. [39] 
proposed an improved audio CAPTCHA that combined with 
reCAPTCHA. In this new scheme, the sounds are not spoken 
text, but audio clips of environmental sounds are used. The 
sounds of objects like train, animals, birds etc. are used. The 
usability is more than 90% of this design. The design of does 
not address the problem of distorted audio but is solved in 
this new scheme. It is real time audio-based challenge. Vari -
ous audio based schemes are highlighted in Table  13.
The user is asked to identify a specific sound, e.g. a piano 
from a series of sounds. The scheme is resistant to all three 
kinds of attack massive guessing (as the wrong input restarts 
the whole CAPTCHA), a human proxy (there is no time for 
an intruding process to collect audio data) and algorithmic 
soling (use of noon textual sounds and less mature audio 
recognition programs).
Table 12  Generation of Puzzle Based CAPTCHAs
Authors Scheme Usability enhancements Usability (%) Security (%) Language
Shirali-Shahreza et al. [59] Question based CAPTCHA Simple math questions 100 100 English
Yamamoto et al [76] SS CAPTCHA Natural Sentences 90–100 0 English
Yamamoto et al [76] Four Panel CAPTCHA Simple Arrangements of 4 Images 100 1/24 English
Manar Mohamed et al. [43] DCG CAPTCHA Games are used 92–100 100 English
1130 M. Kumar et al.
1 3
10.2  Breaking Techniques Audio CAPTCHA
Tam et al. [71] designed a deCAPTCHA tool to break audio 
CAPTCHA. They broke three popular audio CAPTCHAs at 
that time like Google audio CAPTCHA (one speaker saying 
random digits 0–9 with background noise of human voices 
at varying volumes. The author achieved 67% success rate 
in breaking Google audio CAPTCHA. Digg CAPTCHA 
(consists of one speaker saying a random combination of 
letter and digits. There is also a background noise consists 
of static sounds like tricking water, etc. For the simplicity 
0, 1, 2, 5, 9, I, o and z are not present in the challenge. The 
author achieved 71% accuracy in breaking this CAPTCHA. 
Finally, the older version of reCAPTCHA audio CAPTCHA 
(consists of several speakers speaking random digits with 
background noise of human voices at varying volumes. The 
author achieved 45% accuracy in breaking this CAPTCHA. 
The author used SVM and k-NN classifier for breaking these 
CAPTCHA. Bursztein and Bethard [13] also proposed new 
audio CAPTCHA that will contain long phrases from old 
radio audio files with the assumption that the poor quality 
will make it harder to recognize by Automated Sound Rec-
ognizers at the same time not very difficult to the humans. 
eBay audio CAPTCHA is also broken successfully at the 
rate of 75%. The author used the classical steps of breaking 
text-based CAPTCHA to break this audio CAPTCHA like 
preprocessing, segmentation and classification. Although, 
eBay restricted 20 to 40 CAPTCHAs per IP but the author 
has succeeded in getting approximately 100,000 IP using IP 
botnet pool to make a large corpus to breaking CAPTCHA. 
The author used DFT to recognize high energy spikes by 
applying DFT to the wave files. It helps to isolate energy spikes in the audio file. The author also uses the redun -
dancy of eBay CAPTCHA for improving the performance of 
deCAPTCHA. Breaking techniques of audio based schemes 
are highlighted in Table  14.
11  Reported Work on Animation/Video 
CAPTCHAs
11.1  Creation of Animation/Video CAPTCHAs
One of the video CAPTCHA known as Motion CAPTCHA 
was developed by Shirali-Shahreza [58- 60] and Shirali-
Shahreza [61- 65]. In this CAPTCHA a video clip is pre-
sented to the user in which a person performs some action. 
Now, a list of actions is given to the user and the user is 
required to select the correct description according to the 
actions in the clip. This scheme also requires an English 
language proficiency. Kluever and Zanibbi [37] proposed a 
secure and usable video CAPTCHA. The author proposed a 
new Video CAPTCHA that collects videos from YouTube 
database. The new design offers 75% usability and 98% secu -
rity. Cui et al. [25] developed a CAPTCHA based on moving 
objects. The scheme contains English alphabets and Arabic 
numerals. Only 3 letters are used to display in a frame. A 
few attributes are used to make the scheme, dynamic like 
initial position, color, shape, size and moving orbit of each 
object. The author has reported that the scheme is safe from 
Frame Difference attack, Optical Flow based attack, Tem-
poral Difference based attack and Background Subtrac-
tion based attack. The usability results are not discussed in 
detail. Chow and Susilo [23] developed a new Animated 3D 
Table 13  Generation of Audio Based CAPTCHAs
Authors Scheme Usability enhancements Usability (%) Security (%) Language
Shirali-shahreza et al. [66] Spoken CAPTCHA Only respond to a sound clips 92.5 100 English
Bigham and Cavender [10] New Audio CAPTCHA More control on sound playback 68.5 100 English
Lazar et al. [39] Sound Right CAPTCHA Simple identification of a sound (bell)  > 90 100 English
Holman et al. [32] CAPTCHA for Blind Users Just selection of an object is required 100 100 English
Tam et al. [71] Robust Audio CAPTCHA Sound phrases are used  > 70 100 English
Sauer et al. [56, 57] HIPUU Simple images and sounds are combined 90 100 English
Table 14  Breaking Techniques 
of Audio Based CAPTCHAsAuthors Scheme Breaking rate 
(%)Language Technique
Tam et al. [71] Google 67 English Segmentation: Vertical fixed size
Digg 71 Recognition: SVM and k-NN
reCAPTCHA 45
Bursztein and 
Bethard [13]eBay 75 English Segmentation: Vertical
Recognition: DFT
1131 A Systematic Survey on CAPTCHA Recognition: Types, Creation and Breaking Techniques  
1 3
CAPTCHA based on Motion Parallax. It is also a text-based 
CAPTCHA but in 3D. The main characters are rendered over 
background characters. The main characters are also over -
lapped and crowded. Foreground and Background characters 
occupy different depths. All characters have the same font 
and color to make it more secure. But with motion, parallal 
humans can recognize main characters. The concept of per -
spective projection is used, but the characters have similar 
size for making is attack proof. Due to random characters the 
dictionary attack is also not workable. The local and global 
distortions are applied. In this Scheme 3 rows are used. The 
middle row is the challenge. The camera movements and 
rotations are randomized for movements at varying degrees. 
The limitation is that the user must tell very specifically that 
what is to do for this challenge. The authors has reported that 
the scheme is resisted to various computer vision attacks 
like Edge Detection (all foreground and background edges 
are selected), Image Difference (too many overlapping char -
acters), 3D Reconstruction (works only real world scenar -
ios), Optical Flow (fail with noise, texture less regions, and 
non-rigid objects), Brute Force Attack (random characters), 
Machine learning attacks (after training is conducted new 
random challenge is given). Although, the security analyses 
are given yet usability analysis is not given in the scheme. 
Various animation/video based schems are highlighted in 
the following Table  15.
11.2  Breaking Techniques of Animation/Video 
CAPTCHA
Nguyen et al. [46] made efforts to break HelloCAPTCHA 
(84 variations). The author has tried to break animated 
CAPTCHA with simple methods. The 84 variations are 
grouped in 12 broad categories in HelloCAPTCHA. The 
algorithm first identifies the scheme by number of frames, 
maximum frame delay, a few blank frames and background 
colors. Then, for single image extraction, various techniques 
are successfully applied. One of the major techniques is 
PDM (Pixel Delay Map) that uses the concept of pixel dis-
play timing. As in most of the target schemes the main chal-
lenge is displayed more time as compare to noise for making 
it more usable. Another method is Extraction by Calculating Line (CL) in which full character is extracted as it touches 
the vertical line at 1/10 from the upper boundary. A third 
method is Extraction by color Selection (CS) in which char -
acters are extracted of distinct color in the frame that has 
maximum pixels. The fourth method is Extraction by Frame 
Selection (FS) in which vertical segmentation is applied. 
The maximum number of pixels of each character is also 
useful to make the selection by so by counting the number 
of connected pixels the characters are extracted. The fifth 
method, to extract characters is Extraction by Roller Selec-
tion (RS) in which flood fill to extract characters. Finally, 
character recognition is done by simple attacks. The success 
rate is reported 16–100%. Xu et al. [73] published their novel 
attack on moving CAPTCHA. The attack was designed for 
NuCAPTCHA but it is applicable to all kind of moving text 
object CAPTCHAs. The scheme has 4 features: (1) The let-
ters are rendered as rigid objects to make it more usable: 
(2) The background video and foreground character colors 
are constant while maintaining high contrast. It is also for 
making more usable shame; (3) The codeword (actual text 
to be recognized) are random and each have independent 
and overlapping trajectories for enabling users to distin-
guish adjacent characters;(4) Codewords are made up of 
less alphabets for avoiding confusing. The design also has a 
lot of weaknesses like (1) The color is given in the written 
that is be recognized in the text; (2) The length of the text 
not much changed so the number of characters are guessed; 
(3) The trajectories of codewords is constant etc. The attack 
algorithm has 4 major steps: detecting salient features and 
motion, motion trajectories clustering, segmentation and 
code word extraction and classification. For segmentation, 
K-means clustering is used on trajectories and for the clas-
sification neural network is used. For optimize classifica-
tion SIFT features are also exploited. The success rate for 
3 characters is 77%. The study was very comprehensive. 
The author first developed an attack for NuCAPTCHA, 
then they tried to make is more secure and more usable by 
changing the design. But the changed design did not show 
much security. The usability was also not much improved. 
Breaking techniques of animation/video-based schemes are 
highlighted in Table  16.
Table 15  Generation of Animation/Video Based CAPTCHAs
Authors Scheme Usability enhancements Usability (%) Security (%) Language
Cui et al. [25] 3D Animation CAPTCHA NM
Removal C,G,I,O,S,W,Z and 0,2,5,100 100 English
Chow and Susilo [23] AniCAP Easy to understand with Motion Parallax 100 100 English
Shirali-Shahreza [58-60] 
and Shirali-Shahreza 
61[-65]Motion CAPTCHA Easy to get the human movements 100 100 English
Kluever and Zanibbi [37] New video CAPTCHA Tag related videos are used 75 98 English
1132 M. Kumar et al.
1 3
12  Breaking of Mouse CAPTCHA 
and Invisible CAPTCHA
Sivakorn et al. [ 67, 68] proposed a method to falsify the 
popular Google latest reCAPTCHA (Mouse CAPTCHA). 
They conducted a comprehensive study of reCaptcha, and 
explored that how the advance risk analysis process of 
Google new scheme is influenced by each aspect of the 
request. 
Through extensive experimentation, they identified seri-
ous flaws in this scheme that allows adversaries to effort-
lessly influence the risk analysis, bypass restrictions, and 
deploy large-scale attacks. They designed a novel low-cost 
attack that leverages deep learning technologies for the 
semantic annotation of images. Their attack is extremely 
effective, automatically solving 70.78% of the image 
reCaptcha challenges, while requiring only 19 s per chal-
lenge. The Google Invisible CAPTCHA is also the advanced 
version of Mouse CAPTCHA. After passing some chal-
lenges on a particular site the Mouse CAPTCHA is con-
verted to Invisible CAPTCHA and the users actions are 
analyzed in the backend automatically. Kevin et al. [36] 
also developed a method known as unCAPTCHA to attack 
Google reCaptcha by attacking its audio challenge. They 
reported 85.15% success rate over testing of 450 challenges. 
Their method solved successfully broke 450 challenges 
in just 5.42 s. They used speech to text for text genera-
tion and speech recognition systems (Google Cloud, Bing 
Speech Recognition, IBM Bluemix, Google Speech API, 
Wit-AI, and Sphinx) for recognition. They also used the concept of phonetic mapping and ensembling. The failure 
of Mouse CAPTCHA indirectly makes the Invisible unus-
able CAPTCHA also. Breaking techniques of mouse-based 
scheme is highlighted in Table  17.
13  Tools and Techniques for Security Testing 
of Various CAPTCHAS
It is observed that breaking of a CAPTCHA is not trivial 
task. A number of methods and tools are used to break such 
complex challenges in the following Table  18 the various 
tools and techniques are highlighted that are being used by 
the research comminutes to test the security these schemes.
14  Guidelines to Make a Strong CAPTCHA
It is not an easy task to design a secure and usable 
CAPTCHA. It is always a challenge for the research com-
munity to design new ideas for CAPTCHA system. Some 
of the guidelines are discussed to make a string CAPTCHA 
(along with its types) in the following Table  19.
15  Conclusions
In this paper, the authors have surveyed most of the 
CAPTCHA schemes that have been developed around 
the world. The authors have assessed the work done for 
various types like text-based CAPTCHAs (i.e. Arabic, 
Table 16  Breaking techniques of animation/video based CAPTCHAs
Authors Scheme Breaking Rate Database Language Technique
Nguyen et al. [46] Hello 
CAPTCHA 
(84 varients)16–100% Alpha and digits English Segmentation: pixel display timing, color selection, frame 
selection, vertical segmentation, connected pixels, flood 
fill
Recognition: OCR
Xu et al. [73] NuCAPTCHA 77% Combination 
of 3 Reduced 
AlphabetsEnglish Segmentation: k-means Clustering
Feature Extraction (SIFT)
Classification: NN
Table 17  Breaking Techniques of Mouse CAPTCHA
Authors Scheme Breaking rate (%) Database Language Technique
Sivakorn et al. [67, 68] Mouse CAPTCHA 70.78 Infinite images English Image annotation 
services and tag 
classifiers
Kevin et al. [36] unCAPTCHA 85.15 Digits (0–9) English Speech to text
Phonetic maping
Ensembling
Speech recognition
1133 A Systematic Survey on CAPTCHA Recognition: Types, Creation and Breaking Techniques  
1 3
Chinese, Devanagari, Gurumukhi and Roman), image-
based CAPTCHAs, animation-based CAPTCHAs, puzzle-
based CAPTCHAs etc. Also, the authors have presented 
the work done for breaking of these CAPTCHAs schemes. 
The authors have presented recognition accuracies achieved 
for images, characters and numeral of different CAPTCHA 
schemes. The authors have seen that most of the break -
ing methods are based on recognition techniques that are 
based on supervised machine learning techniques. It is also observed that recognition is not big hurdle these days due 
to the advancement in the classification algorithms, but the 
schemes that is segment proof is still safer in the modern 
times. If the work is done to improve the anti-segmentation 
of these CAPTCHA schemes, specially text-based schemes, 
then this technique can be used even for upcoming years.Table 18  Security Testing Techniques Various CAPTCHAs
Scheme Segmentation, classification tools 
and techniquesSecurity testing and techniques Tools for security testing
Text based CAPTCHAs Bivariate Harr Wavelet Filter, 
Dictionary Attacks, Pixel Counts, 
Log Gabor 2D Filter, Connected 
Components,Color Filling Seg-
mentation, Horizontal/Vertical 
Projections Shape Context Match-
ing, Correlations and Distortion 
Estimations,Hidden Morkov Mode, kNN, SVM, 
DNN,MCDNN,CNNTesserect, WMR (Word Model Rec-
ognizer), Accuscript, CMR, HMM 
Recognizer,
Image Based CAPTCHAs Partial Credit Algorithm, Image 
annotation generator like Clarifai, 
NeuralTalk, Fake Click Implemen-
tationkNN, SVM (using Color and texture 
features), Tag Classification, 
Google Reverse Classification, 
HSV ModelOpenCV toolkit, Sklearn
Face.com API
Audio Based CAPTCHAs DFT, Vertical Projection Ada Boost, SVM, kNN, Sphinx, Decaptcha
Video and Animation 
Based CAPTCHAsPixel display timing, color selection, 
frame selection, vertical segmenta-
tion, connected pixels, flood fill, 
SIFTOCR, NN, k-means clustering ABBYY Fine Reader 11 Professional 
Edition
1134 M. Kumar et al.
1 3
References
 1. Aboufadel E, Olsen J, Windle J (2005) Breaking the holiday inn 
priority club CAPTCHA. College Math J 36(2):101–108
 2. Ahmad A, Yan J (2012) CAPTCHA color, usability and security. 
IEEE Internet Comput 16(2):1089–7801
 3. Ahn L, Blum M, Langford J (2004) Telling humans and computers 
apart automatically. Commun ACM 47(2):56–60
 4. Algwil A, Ciresanand D, Liu B (2016) A security analysis of 
automated chinese turing tests. In: Proceedings of the 32nd annual 
conference on computer security applications, pp 520–532
 5. Almazyad A, Ahmad Y, Kouchay S (2011) Multi-modal 
CAPTCHA: a user verification scheme. In: Proceedings of Table 19  Guidelines to make a 
strong CAPTCHAScheme Guidelines for making secure CAPTCHA
Text based CAPTCHAs Letters should be perceptually connected and physically disconnected 
(using arcs)
Uniform FG and BG provides more security
More overlapping is effective if random overlapping is used within 
characters
Juxtaposing characters in any direction is better
Noise color should be used
In case of slant text gaps are useful
Mosaic effects are useful if discontinuity in strokes that remove parts of 
text
Waves and arcs/jaws are useful if wave thickness is same as character 
thickness
Randomize line length and match its color with text
Fragmentation provides more security
More complex background noise is not easily reversed
Random number, size, width and positions of character is more effective
Loops and shared white components less distinguishable
Let characters connect more randomly
Cluttering is not effective as projection finds them very easily. Also mid-
dle axis separation is very effective in finding these clutters
Use all layers of security not only one like segmentation (background, 
lines, collapsing), recognition (multi fonts, font size, distortion, blur -
ring, tilting, waving, rotation) and all Combine more than one distor -
tions
Use large lines, not use strange slope but match is with text slope
Use unpredictable collapsing but not use aggressive collapsing
Use larger character set
Broken contour are good for more security
Thick interference arcs should cut through characters
Crowded characters provides better anti segmentation
Occluding lines shapes should be sine or blob
Both type of warping (global and local) are best for security
Image based CAPTCHAs Social web sites must improve the authentication mechanism
Dynamically increase the image database
Deployment of scheme in conjunction with IP monitoring scheme
Intelligent Tagging of images
Audio based CAPTCHAs Use of phrase instead of isolated words
Make it universally usable by inclusion of multiple languages
Combine images with audio sounds
Video and animation based 
CAPTCHAsThe number and positions of characters in animations should not be fixed
Intelligent use of colors
Use of variable number of frames
Optimum delay in frames
Usage of GIF must be avoided
Lengthy video stream must be preferred
Random changes in color
Funding No funding was received.
Declarations  
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.
Research Involving Human Participants and/or Animals No human and 
animal participants were used.
1135 A Systematic Survey on CAPTCHA Recognition: Types, Creation and Breaking Techniques  
1 3
international conference on information science and applications 
(ICISA), pp 1–7
 6. Alsuhibany S (2011) Optimizing CAPTCHA generation. In: Pro-
ceedings of 6th international conference on availability, reliability 
and security (ARES), pp 740–745
 7. Alsuhibany S (2016) A benchmark for designing usable and secure 
text-based CAPTCHAs. Int J Netw Sec Its Appl 8(4):41–54
 8. Alsuhibany S (2018) Generating Arabic handwritten CAPTCHA 
for cyber security. Int J Comput Sci Netw Sec 18(3):41–47
 9. Bansal A, Garg A, Gupta A, Gupta A (2008) Breaking A Visual 
CAPTCHA: A Novel Approach Using HMM, pp 1–6.
 10. Bigham J, Cavender A (2009) Evaluating existing audio 
CAPTCHAs and an interface optimized for non-visual use. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in com-
puting systems, pp 1829–1838.
 11. Bongard MM (1970) Pattern recognition. Hyden Book Co., New 
York
 12. Bursztein E, Aigrain J, Moscicki A (2014) The end is nigh: 
generic solving of text-based CAPTCHAs. In: Proceedings of 
8th USENIX workshop on offensive technologies (WOOT 14), 
pp 1–15
 13. Bursztein E, Bethard S (2009) DeCAPTCHA: breaking 75% of 
eBay audio CAPTCHAs. In: Proceedings of 3rd USENIX work -
shop on offensive technologies, pp 1–7.
 14. Bursztein E, Martin M, Mitchell J (2011) Text-based CAPTCHA 
strengths and weaknesses. In: Proceedings of the 18th ACM con-
ference on computer and communications security, pp 125–138
 15. Bursztein E, Moscicki A, Fabry C (2014) Easy does it: more usa-
ble CAPTCHAs. In: Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM confer -
ence on human factors in computing systems, pp 2637–2646.
 16. Chakrabarti S, Singhal M (2007) Password-based authentication: 
preventing dictionary attacks. Computer 40(6):68–74
 17. Chellapilla K, Larson K, Simard P, Czerwinski M (2005) Design-
ing human friendly human interaction proofs (HIPs). In: Proceed-
ings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing 
systems, pp 711–720
 18. Chellapilla K, Simard P (2004) Using machine learning to break 
visual human interaction proofs (HIPs). In: Proceedings of the 
advances in neural information processing systems, pp 265–272
 19. Chen J, Luo X, Guo Y (2017) A survey on breaking technique of 
text-based CAPTCHA. In: Security and communication networks, 
pp 1–15
 20. Chew M, Baird HS (2003) Baffle text: a human interactive proof. 
Proc SPIE 5010:305–316
 21. Chew M, Tygar J (2004) Image recognition CAPTCHAs. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 7th international information security conference 
(ISC 2004), pp 268–279
 22. Chow R, Golle P, Jakobsson M, Wang L, Wang X (2008) Making 
CAPTCHA clickable. In: Proceedings of the 9th workshop on 
mobile computing systems and applications, pp 91–94
 23. Chow W, Susilo W (2011) AniCAP: an animated 3D CAPTCHA 
scheme based on motion parallax. In: Proceedings of 10th interna-
tional conference on cryptology and network security, pp 255–271
 24. Coates A, Baird H, Fateman R (2001) Pessimal print: a reverse 
turing test. In: Proceedings of international conference on docu-
ment analysis and recognition, pp 1154–1158
 25. Cui S, Mei J, Zhang W (2010) A CAPTCHA implementation 
based on moving objects recognition problem. In: International 
conference on E-business and E-government, pp 1277–1280
 26. Elson J, Douceur J, Howell J (2007) Asirra: a CAPTCHA that 
exploits interest-aligned manual image categorization. In: Pro -
ceedings of CCS, pp 366–374
 27. Gao H, Wang W, Qi J (2013) The robustness of hollow 
CAPTCHAs. In: Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC confer -
ence on computer and communications security, pp 1075–1086 28. Gao H, Yan J, Cao F (2016) A simple generic attack on text 
CAPTCHAs. In: Proceedings of network and distributed system 
security symposium (NDSS), pp 1–14
 29. Golle P (2008) Machine learning attacks against the asirra 
CAPTCHA. In: Proceedings of the 15th ACM conference on 
computer and communications security, pp 535–542
 30. Golle P, Ducheneaut N (2005) Preventing bots from playing online 
games. ACM Comput Entertain 3(3):1–10
 31. Hilaire S, Kim H, Kim C (2010) How to deal with bot scum in 
MMORPGs. In: Proceedings of IEEE international workshop 
technical committee on communications quality and reliability 
(CQR), pp 1–6
 32. Holman J, Lazar J, Feng J (2007) Developing usable CAPTCHAs 
for blind users. In: Proceedings of the 9th international ACM 
SIGACCESS conference on computers and accessibility, pp 
245–246
 33. Huang S, Lee Y, Bell G (2010) An efficient segmentation algo-
rithm for CAPTCHAs with line cluttering and character warping. 
Multimedia Tools Appl 48(2):267–289
 34. Hussain R, Gao H, Kumar K (2016) Recognition of merged char -
acters in text based CAPTCHAs. In: Proceedings of 3rd interna-
tional conference on computing for sustainable global develop-
ment, pp 16–18
 35. Imsamai M, Phimoltares S (2010) 3D CAPTCHA: a next genera-
tion of the CAPTCHA. In: Proceedings of international confer -
ence on information science and applications (ICISA), pp 1–8
 36. Kevin B, Daven P, George H, Dave L (2017) University of Mary -
land unCaptcha: a low-resource defeat of reCaptcha’s audio chal -
lenge. In: WOOT 17-proceedings of the 11th USENIX conference 
on offensive technology
 37. Kluever K, Zanibbi R (2009) Balancing usability and security in 
a video CAPTCHA. In: Proceedings of the 5th symposium on 
usable privacy and security (SOUPS), pp 1–11
 38. Kumari B, Kumawat A, Gaur H (2017) Enhancing the security 
of CAPTCHA based on the new character locations. In: Proceed-
ings of 4th international conference on computing for sustainable 
global development, pp 6997–7001
 39. Lazar J, Feng J, Brooks T (2012) The sounds right CAPTCHA: 
an improved approach to audio human interaction proofs for blind 
users. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors 
in computing systems, pp 2267–2276
 40. Li C, Sudani W, Wang J, Liu F, Gill A (2010) Protection through 
multimedia CAPTCHA. In: Proceedings of 8th international con-
ference on advances in mobile computing and multimedia, pp 
63–68
 41. Tang M, Gao H, Zhang Y (2019) Research on deep learning tech-
niques in breaking text-based captchas and designing image-based 
captcha. IEEE Trans Inf Forensics Secur 5(10):2522–2537
 42. Mehrnejad M, Bafghi A, Harati A, Toreini E (2011) Multiple 
SEIMCHA: multiple semantic image CAPTCHA. In: Interna -
tional conference on internet technology and secured transactions 
(ICITST), pp 196–201
 43. Mohamed M, Gao S, Saxena N (2014) Dynamic cognitive game 
CAPTCHA usability and detection of streaming-based farming. 
In: Proceedings of the workshop on usable security (USEC), pp 
1–10
 44. Mori G, Malik J (2003) Recognizing objects in adversarial clutter: 
breaking a visual CAPTCHA. In: Proceedings of IEEE computer 
society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 
pp 1–134
 45. Moy G, Jones N, Harkless C (2004) Distortion estimation tech-
niques in solving visual CAPTCHAs. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 
computer society conference on computer vision and pattern rec-
ognition, pp 1–6
1136 M. Kumar et al.
1 3
 46. Nguyen V, Chow Y, Susilo W (2012) Breaking an animated 
CAPTCHA scheme. In: International conference on applied cryp-
tography and network security, pp 12–29.
 47. Nguyen V, Chow Y, Susilo W (2014) On the security of text-based 
3D CAPTCHAs. Comput Sec 45:84–99
 48. Naor M. (1998) Verification of a human in the loop, or identifica -
tion via the turing test. http:// www. wisdom. weizm ann. ac. il/ ~naor/  
PAPERS/ human. pdf
 49. Pinkas B, Sander T (2002) Securing passwords against dictionary 
attacks. In: Proceedings of 9th conference on computer and com-
munications security, pp 161–170
 50. Polakis L, Lanciniand M, Kontaxis G (2012) All your face are 
belong to us: breaking Facebook’s social authentication. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 28th annual computer security applications confer -
ence, pp 399–408
 51. Pope C, Kaur K (2005) Is it human or computer? Defending 
e-commerce with CAPTCHAs. IT Profess 7(2):43–49
 52. Ramaiah C, Govindaraju V (2015) A sigma-lognormal model for 
character level CAPTCHA generation. In: Proceedings of 13th 
international conference on document analysis and recognition, 
pp 966–970
 53. Rusu A, Govindaraju V (2004) Handwritten CAPTCHA: using 
the difference in the abilities of humans and machines to read 
handwritten words. In: Proceedings of 9th IAPR international 
workshop on frontiers of handwriting recognition, pp 226–231
 54. Rusu A, Thomas A, Govindaraju V (2010) Generation and use of 
handwritten CAPTCHAs. Int J Doc Anal Recogn 13:49–64
 55. Saini B, Bala A (2013) Bot protection using CAPTCHA: Guru-
mukhi script. Int J Appl Innov Eng Manag 2(5):267–275
 56. Sauer G, Holman J, Lazar J (2010) Accessible privacy and secu-
rity: a universally usable human-interaction proof tool. Univ 
Access Inf Soc 9(3):239–248
 57. Sauer G, Lazar J, Hochheiseret H (2010) Towards a universally 
usable human interaction proof: evaluation of task completion 
strategies. ACM Trans Access Comput 2(4):15:1-15:32
 58. Shirali-Shahreza M, Shirali-Shahreza S (2007) Collage 
CAPTCHA. In: Proceedings of 9th international symposium on 
signal processing and its applications, 1–4.
 59. Shirali-Shahreza M, Shirali-Shahreza S (2007) Online collage 
CAPTCHA. In: Proceedings of 8th international workshop on 
image analysis for multimedia interactive services, pp 58–58
 60. Shirali-Shahreza M, Shirali-Shahreza S (2007) Question-based 
CAPTCHA. In: Proceedings of the international conference on 
computational intelligence and multimedia applications (ICCIMA 
2007), vol 4, pp 54–58
 61. Shirali-Shahreza M, Shirali-Shahreza S (2008) Advanced collage 
CAPTCHA. In: Proceedings of 5th international conference on 
information technology: new generations, pp 1234–1235
 62. Shirali-Shahreza M, Shirali-Shahreza S (2008) Dynamic 
CAPTCHA. In: International symposium on communications 
and information technologies, pp 436–440
 63. Shirali-Shahreza M, Shirali-Shahreza S (2008) A CAPTCHA sys-
tem for Nintendo DS. In: Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM 
workshop on network and system support for games, pp 104–105
 64. Shirali-Shahreza M, Shirali-Shahreza S (2008) Motion 
CAPTCHA. In: Proceedings of conference on human system 
interactions, pp 142–144 65. Shirali-Shahreza M, Shirali-Shahreza S (2008) CAPTCHA for 
children. In: Proceedings of international conference on system 
of systems engineering, pp 1–6
 66. Shirali-shahreza S, Abolhassani H, Sameti H, Shirali-shahreza M 
(2009) Spoken CAPTCHA: a CAPTCHA system for blind users. 
Int Colloq Comput Commun Control Manag 1:221–224
 67. Sivakorn S, Polakis I, Angelos D (2016) I am robot deep learning 
to break semantic image CAPTCHAs. In: Proceedings of IEEE 
European symposium on security and privacy, pp 388–403
 68. Sivakorn S, Polakis I, Keromytis A (2016) I’m not a human: 
breaking the Google reCAPTCHA. In: Proceedings of annual 
computer security applications conference (ACSAC), pp 399–408
 69. Susilo W, Chow Y, Zhou H (2010) STE3D-CAP: stereoscopic 
3D CAPTCHA. In: International conference on cryptology and 
network security CANS 2010: lecture notes in computer science, 
vol 6467, pp 221–240
 70. Taal K, Atal A, Singh D (2013) reCAPTCHA assisted OCR for 
Devanagari texts. In: Proceedings of the 1st Indian workshop on 
machine learning, pp 1–2
 71. Tam J, Simsa J, Huggins-Daines D (2008) Improving audio 
CAPTCHAs. In: Proceedings of international symposium on 
usable privacy and security (SOUPS), pp 1–2
 72. Thomas A, Chaudhury S, Govindaraju V (2010) Leveraging the 
mixed-text segmentation problem to design secure handwritten 
CAPTCHAs. In: Proceedings of 12th IAPR international confer -
ence on handwriting recognition, pp 13–18
 73. Xu Y, Reynaga G, Chiasson S (2012) Security and usability chal-
lenges of moving-object CAPTCHAs: decoding codewords in 
motion. In: Proceedings of 21st USENIX security symposium, 
pp 49–64
 74. Yalamanchili S, Rao K (2011) A framework for Devanagari script-
based CAPTCHA. Int J Adv Inf Technol 1(4):47–57
 75. Yamamoto T, Suzuki T, Nishigaki M (2011) A proposal of four-
panel cartoon CAPTCHA: the concept. In: Proceedings of inter -
national conference on advanced information networking and 
applications (AINA), pp 159–166
 76. Yamamoto T, Tygar J, Nishigaki M (2010) CAPTCHA using 
strangeness in machine translation. In: Proceedings of 24th IEEE 
international conference on advanced information networking and 
applications (AINA), pp 430–437
 77. Yan J, Ahmad A (2008) A low-cost attack on a Microsoft 
CAPTCHA. In: Proceedings of the 15th ACM conference on 
computer and communications security, pp 543–554
 78. Yan Y, Ahmad A (2007) Breaking visual CAPTCHAs with naive 
pattern recognition algorithms. In: Proceedings of the 23rd annual 
computer security applications conference, pp 279–291
 79. Yardi S, Feamster N, Bruckman A (2008) Photo-Based Authen-
tication using Social Networks. In: Proceedings of the first work -
shop on Online social networks, pp 55–60
 80. Yu J, Ma X, Han T (2016) Usability investigation on the localiza-
tion of text CAPTCHAs: take chinese characters as a case study. 
School of Media and Design, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
Shanghai, China, ResearchGate, pp 1–23
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Archives
of
Computational
Methods
in
Engineering
is
a
copyright
of
Springer,
2022.
All
Rights
Reserved.
